Let's start with today's lesson anyway. We are essentially picking up where we left off from last time, which was, seems ages ago, because of ILW, right? And then prior to that, it was one of those crazy holidays. So, given this, it's been a long time. I had to even check the Canvas recording as to where we actually stopped our lesson last time, because I couldn't even remember. So, this is essentially where we left off. Let me just put the screen up. A slideshow from... Oh, nope, not that one. What the hell? I already had it on the correct page. Oh, dear. Ah, okay. Slideshow from... Current slide. There we go. All right. Let me just share this. Share, share, share. And let's get this working. Share. Okay. Here we go. Right? Okay. So, according to what I could view from our recording where we left off, essentially, we were talking about what the characteristics are for a good amplifier. So, recall that I went into quite a bit of time telling you about frequency response and all about this impedance stuff. Okay. So, the frequency response is with regard to this high bandwidth thing here, the radio button here, which is this one. Okay? Okay. And that's where we stopped last time. Okay. So at this point, we're supposed to be ready to jump into the modeling of the transistor amplifier. And hang on, it's just a little bit warmer than I expect. So let me just get this electric fan going. This is crazy. Ah, okay. So it would seem that the temperatures these days are... The last two days, the temperature was just like it was during summer, which is crazy. But anyway, all right. So here we go. Let's go forward with this. Let me just get it going to the next slide. So we're going to talk about the transistor equivalent model. And you might recall from way back then when we met, I did mention that there is basically, you know, one very, very important and popular model. All right. Which is basically the idea of the model is to use equations to basically describe the transistor, which allows you to numerically calculate its performance characteristic, the particular operating point. Okay. So the most popular of those, which is accepted essentially by industry is, sorry, what is called as the hybrid pie model. All right. And the hybrid pie model, unfortunately, as I might have mentioned last time, is unfortunately quite complex. It's basically what is called as a two-part model. So it has one side, which is theoretically the input, as well as the output side of it, which is sort of expected. But these two ports are interconnected in such a way that the model captures how the input and output sides basically affect each other, which is really what happens in a transistor circuit. So in a typical transistor configuration, such as the common emitter, we usually have the base as the input to whatever signal we want to amplify. And we use the collector as the output for the amplified signal. Now, the thing here is what most people don't necessarily realize is that whatever output loading you'd actually do, or whatever circuit configuration you'd actually do on the output side can affect the input. Not only can, but actually does affect the input characteristics. So the beauty of the hybrid pie model is that even if it is not really actually a complete model, it is quite good such that industry actually uses the hybrid pie model as its basis for providing information on the data sheet. In other words, if you look at the data sheet of a transistor, you will find the parameters associated with the hybrid pie so that you can just pick up those values and use them to do your hand calculations of the transistor circuit that you had in mind. Okay. So as I might have mentioned before, we've been using beta as our figure of merit, if you like, for our transistor IC over IB. So that's the figure of merit for the transistor. But in fact, this beta is equivalent to the hybrid pie model called HFE. All right. And so if you're going to look at the data sheet of a 2222, for example, it would list HFE as the parameter. It would not say data. All right. And so if you've ever wondered about that, or if you've had to look at the data sheet and wondered why it's called HFE, well, there's your H there, which is your hybrid pie model. And there are several parameters there, HOE, HFE, and so on and so forth. Okay. So there you go. Now, the thing with the hybrid pie model is that it is quite complex and difficult to use, even if. And the whole idea, of course, again, behind it is the more complex the model, the better it captures the actual performance of the part. Okay. And as I said, it's probably more complex than what we might need for general purposes and for just getting a quick estimate. And secondly, we have possibly significantly more accurate modeling capabilities now where we can use a computer to numerically simulate the performance of a transistor circuit. So given that, you know, it's, it's, if you like, it's like talking about using assembly language, for example, to program a CPU. All right. So you might think of the hybrid pie model as, you know, complex, complex, just like programming in assembly language. When in fact, not unless you need very, very accurate and explicit control of, you know, timing parameters, resource allocation, and so on and so forth. You might be able to do, you know, you might be able to do, you know, an easier programming using high level language. Okay. And so that high level language might be the equivalent of using a simpler model here, which captures the essence of the circuit where without going into such difficulties or complexities. And again, in the end, if you really want a much more accurate simulation of the circuit, you can go to LP SPICE or some similar higher performance circuit simulation for which even the hybrid pie equivalent model is not going to be as good at anyway. All right. So for example, as I said, the hybrid pie model tries to capture the performance of the transistor circuit in about four or five different parameters. Whereas if you look at the model that you have in LP SPICE, right, if you look at the model that you have in LP SPICE, you'll find that the transistor models there usually have something in the order of about 10, 15 parameters. So it's a much more complete model that LP SPICE. That LP SPICE uses. It's something like the Gumbelpoon model or something like that. Okay. All right. So there you go with that. So having said that, this is the impetus for basically concentrating on the RE model that you see over here, which actually stands for emitter resistance model. Okay. Emitter resistance model. Okay. So that's what we're going to concentrate on. Let's have a look at this. All right. Oops. I forgot to erase the stuff. Sorry. Where's our eraser? Eraser. Eraser. Clear. Okay. There we go. All right. So what is this emitter resistance model? So BJTs, as we can see here, all right, are basically current control devices. The equation associated with it, which is IE is equal to IC plus IB. You'll notice that the equations associated with the DC models of the transistor are all basically pretty much based on current. So beta is equal to IC over IB. All right. And those are the governing equations associated with it. All right. The emitter resistance model basically uses a diode and the current source to duplicate the behavior of the transistor. All right. And given this, all right, the disadvantage supposedly is that it's sensitive to DC levels. The model here is sensitive to DC levels. And actually it's not mentioned, but maybe it is somewhere else. It also is not particularly accurate when it comes to higher frequency operation of the transistor. Okay. Higher frequency operation of the transistor. So it's basically a good approximation at low frequencies. All right. Okay. So having said that, well, that's still going to be useful for us because most of the expectations at this point would be that, you know, you're not really going to be designing or using transistors for high frequency operation anyway. Hmm. All right. And so let's go forward with this. All right. So here is a, an overview of the derivations and equations that you would need to be familiar with. So the basic idea as stated earlier, it's the equivalent of a diode and the current source. The model for the transistor is a diode and the current source. And that's shown here. Here's your diode. And here's your current source. Okay. Where the governing equation for the output current for a common emitter configuration, by the way. So we're only going to be showing you the common emitter configuration. Again, for simplification purposes, of course, you might argue there's common base and there's common collector. Okay. So again, the common emitter is the most often used amplifier configuration anyway. And we just want to give you some basic information on how this is modeled. Okay. Okay. So for the common emitter configuration, the output side of it is the collector. And as you can see, that's where this thing is being shown. All right. The collector side of things. And although this might be a little bit confusing because this looks like a common base, but don't worry about it yet. All right. So what's this? And the input side is over here. Come to think of it, this does look more like a common base configuration. But anyway, it's still the same thing. That's why there's really not much difference between them. So bottom line is the thing is modeled by the diode, a diode being connected from base to emitter. And then the output is something like a collector to base configuration with a constant or with a current source. Okay. And that current source, the current output is governed essentially by this equation. And all that current essentially is a function of the base current somehow. Okay. So the governing equation here, as shown, essentially is that the emitter current is equal to beta plus 1 IB. We know this already because we've been using this equation since before. And if you were to assume that the transistor gain is high enough, then the equation can be simplified slightly by just dropping the plus 1 and saying that the emitter current is approximately equal to beta IB. Now, we know, of course, that this is actually more like the collector current, all right? This is actually the collector current, which would be the equivalent of saying that IE is roughly equal to I sub C in the first place for transistors with a significant amount of gain. So this is true for typically small signal transistors operating in a region which favors their beta performance, where you can say that the beta value is, you know, 70, 100, and even 200. Okay. And it does not apply very well to high-powered transistors whose beta is or has a tendency to be lower. So high-powered transistors or those that are designed for high current operation and high power dissipation. Most infamously, for example, like the 2N3055 or the 2N3771, these are TO3 transistors, big ones, all right? Where their beta for the 2N3771, if I recall, is very, very low. Something like even just 25 or 30, all right? Just 25 or even just 30 as a beta. So those are very low values. And when you have such low values, this approximation here, where IE is roughly equal to IC, is definitely not a very good approximation anymore. Okay. So anyway, having said that, we're concentrating on small signal, again, to make life a little bit easy. The other thing that we want to take note of is we can calculate the resistance equivalent, all right? There is a resistive characteristic. You might recall that a diode curve looks like this, all right? And at a particular operating point, we can approximate this as an equivalent resistance. Okay? So in that curve, if we have a particular operating point, we can approximate its resistance. And this one is saying that the approximate resistance is equivalent to this equation here, which is 26 millivolts divided by the emitter current. Now, okay. So this is a weird approximation. So this is a weird correlation. You might recall that this 26 millivolts essentially is part of the basic characteristic of the semiconductor. It was mentioned some time ago, all right? In some previous, previous, previous slide. Okay. And so we're just going to stick with this and say amen for now. 26 millivolts over IE is the emitter resistance equivalent, which will turn out to be a very important factor, all right? In the calculation of the expected voltage gain of the transistor. Okay? So these equations are very important to keep in mind. And, well, fortunately for us, they're quite easy to memorize. Okay? All right. So having said that, let's clear this and go to the next slide here. Okay? So for the common emitter configuration, the following equations are assumed by the emitter resistance model. Okay? So the input impedance, all right, is equal to beta times RE. All right? That's the input impedance with the emitter directly connected to ground. All right? The output impedance is equal to infinity. Okay? The output impedance of the transistor alone is considered to be infinity given that the output is driven by a current source. So that's basically the reason why it's got an infinite output impedance. It's just the current source. Okay? The voltage gain, all right, is basically for the transistor alone. Is equal to, well, RL, which is the output resistor, divided by the RE, emitter equivalent resistance. That's why I was saying a while ago, this is an important factor, that Rt, if you might recall from the previous slide, is equal to 26 millivolts divided by the emitter current. So that's why it's important because you're going to be putting that value here to calculate the voltage gain of the transistor circuit. And finally, your current gain, A sub i, is basically equal to beta. And that's on the assumption that the output impedance is infinite. So there you go with that. Pretty straightforward. Very, very simple. Not hard, hopefully, to remember. And given this, you should now be able to do some calculations by just using these equations. You should be able to do calculations already to give you a ballpark figure as to how much voltage gain your circuit might produce, given a set of conditions for the source along with its source impedance, as well as its output driving a particular other circuit or load. Okay? All right. So let's have a look at that. All right. Well, this is fresh in your brain. And, of course, as we go through this, hopefully, you have the, what's this, interactive opportunity to ask questions. If there is something that is not clear. Okay? So let's give this a go. Here is the common emitter amplifier configuration. All right. And look very, very carefully at this circuit and have your questions ready if you have any questions. Typically, again, everybody is going to be passive. Maybe you're not even listening. I don't know. But this is a voltage divider bias configuration. Okay? Voltage divider bias configuration. And you will see that a complete circuit, which actually has been shown several times before, would include for the voltage divider bias or any transistor configuration that's designed to do amplification in the first place, will have these capacitors here. Okay? So you have C1 and C3, which are your input and output capacitors. All right? And in particular, important to note that we have the C2 here, which is a capacitor from the emitter to ground. Okay? Now, what are the things that you have to remember that I mentioned before? Okay? Well, all right. For our treatment of capacitors, when we were doing DC analysis, all right, for DC analysis, what did we do with the capacitors when we were talking about DC analysis? Sige nga. Can somebody answer please? Just put it up here in chat. Anybody? For DC analysis, what did we do with the capacitors in the circuit? Oy, nandyan ba kayo? Hello? Yep. Okay. So that's right. We basically ignored the capacitor. We treated them as open circuit. Okay? So for DC analysis, the capacitors basically are treated as not being there. Okay? And on the other hand, all right, for AC analysis, for AC analysis, okay, we basically treat the capacitors as short circuit. Okay? All right? So for our capacitors, all right, in AC analysis, we treat the capacitors as short circuits. So in other words, they are supposed to look something like this. Okay? Short circuit. Okay. Now, I don't know if I've mentioned this before because it's been a lesson so long ago. All right? Obviously, all right? Obviously, when we talk about DC and AC, in this case, it's as if the two of them are so vastly different from each other. Okay? So a DC voltage might be 10 volts, and that would mean that it's a steady 10 volts. Where there's zero and there's plus 10 over here. It's a steady 10 volts. Okay? Whereas, you might say that an AC signal would look something like this. All right? Now, here's the thing that could be confusing for some people. So what would you call a signal that basically looks like this? All right? So here's your zero volts. And here, all right? Somewhere around here, this is 10 volts. So do you call that, all right? Do you call this a DC or AC signal? All right? Is this a DC or an AC signal? All right? So here's the thing. All right? DC and AC are just concepts, all right? That help describe a signal. All right? We need to know how to treat them. And if you take an AC signal, all right? If you take an AC signal and you say that, oh, well, here's an AC signal at maybe something like 10 hertz. All right? You can easily think about the signal that is of a much lower frequency and say, here is an AC signal also, but it is only 2 hertz. All right? And then here is an AC signal that is 1 hertz. And you can also think and say that, well, here is an AC signal that is 0.5 hertz and so on and so forth. And you can keep going and going and going lower and 0.1, 0.01, 0.0001 hertz. And what does that signal look like? Well, a 0.001 hertz signal looks like basically this, right? Which is a pretty good and close match to DC. So everything is basically relative, right? Everything is basically relative. So that can be a point of argument or confusion or whatever. But when we are talking about DC versus AC analysis, we're sort of assuming that the two of these are very, very far apart from each other. All right? All right? So think about it that an AC signal, all right? An AC signal is a DC signal that is wiggling. All right? All right? All right? All right? An AC signal is a DC signal that is wiggling. Amplitude-wise. Or you can think of a DC signal. All right? What was I saying? An AC signal is a DC signal that's wiggling. All right? A DC signal is an AC signal whose frequency is so low that we don't perceive it as a signal that is changing. So they're not really that different from each other. They're just describing possibly the same signal from a slightly different perspective. Okay? All right? And the whole point of this discussion that we're having at this point, all right, is to say that when you are simplifying things and saying that these capacitors are shortened when we're doing AC analysis, or when we're doing DC analysis, these are just, again, extreme points of consideration. The world in between actually says that these capacitors are neither completely shorted nor completely open. And you know that the capacitor has an equivalent impedance, which is basically governed by the equation X sub C is equal to 1 over J omega C. And again, if you are confused or don't quite relate to the concept of reactants, all right, you can think of this as being equivalent in a funny way to resistance. Okay? Reactants is just resistance, if you like, at a different angle. Okay? Okay? Resistance is at zero. Reactants is at 90 degrees to zero. So even if they are on different orientations polar-wise, they are very, very similar in concept. So you can think of it in that way, if you like, all right, and say that the equivalent resistance of the capacitor, all right, I'll put it in quotation marks here, is equal to 1 over J omega C. And again, this is basically 2 pi F, all right? Our J omega C, or omega for that matter, is basically simply 2 pi F. So what's the important thing to consider here? The fact that we are talking about a frequency, all right? And that's why when we do DC analysis, the frequency of the signal is zero hertz. So what happens when you put zero into this bottom part of this equation, all right, 2 pi Fc. If you substitute this with zero hertz, this bottom part of the equation becomes zero, which means that the equivalent RC, all right, the equivalent resistance of the capacitor, actually reactants, becomes infinite. All right? So this is just a quick reminder, all right? This is your C from 1 being reminded. And that's why when we do DC analysis, we can say that the capacitors are equivalent to open circuits because their reactants becomes infinite when we are talking about a zero hertz frequency, which is what DC is. Okay? All right? Now, when we talk about actually having a frequency here, a particular frequency of interest or test, say, for example, 1 kilohertz, and we want to characterize the circuit, then the reality is you can actually calculate an equivalent reactants, okay, for these components at that particular frequency. So if you want to be more accurate, okay, you can actually calculate the equivalent reactants of the capacitors at the frequency of interest if it's stated, all right? And you get a much more accurate numerical result if you did that, okay? Now, on the other hand, because we're just starting out, we're just going to ignore all of that. This is information that you're going to need going forward. But for now, okay, we are going to assume that the frequency of operation is high enough, all right? The frequency of operation is high enough such that the reactants of the capacitor is small enough such that we can approximate it to be zero. Zero ohms, okay? That's what we're going to be doing, all right? That's why we can think of this as short circuits, all right, with AC signal because we're assuming that the frequency of operation is so high that the equivalent reactants of the capacitor is pretty much zero. Okay? Okay? All right. Now, what you're going to find is that in most circuits that are designed correctly, the capacitor's reactants is not really zero quite there yet, okay? So a more accurate result will be obtained by actually substituting the correct reactants values. For now, let's just go with this. Okay. Other questions so far? May tanong ba o wala? We clear? Okay. Yes? Okay. Isa lang ng thumbs up. May mga iba. Hello? About the others. Marami tayong ghost ngayon. Kung tinataman. Okay. Ayan. Okay. Nagising na. Nagabot na sa ano. Oops. Let's press that button. Alright. So let's go forward with this. Alright. Ah, yeah. Couple of points here that are important but you probably already know. The common emitter amplifier exhibits a high voltage and current gain. The output signal is 180 degrees out of phase with the input. So if we put in a signal that looks like this, the output is 180 degrees out of phase. It's the exact reverse. So if I superimpose it, it will look something like this is very poorly drawn. I'm sorry. Okay. It will look something like this. It is the exact 180 degrees reverse compared to the input. Okay. I think we've explained this before even with DC analysis. Right. So as the current, as the signal goes upward, the current here increases. Therefore, the collector current also increases which pulls the output down. As I sub C goes up, V sub C goes down. That's why we get a reverse phase for the output signal. Okay. And this is getting to look really ugly. So let's remove that. All right. Now let's go and have a quick look and let's analyze the circuit. So try to memorize these values. All right. R1 is 22k. R2 is 6.8k. That forms the voltage divider. R1 is 560 ohms. Although we're going to get shunted. It gets shunted by the capacitor where the equivalent resistance is considered to be zero. And R sub C is 1k. All right. And see if you can remember that. Beta AC in this case, the AC beta is 160. Okay. All right. So let's have a quick look at this. Go to the next stage. All right. And I have to erase everything first. No, let's not erase everything like that way. Erase by clearing everything. And let's go to the next page. All right. Okay. I'm about to my next page. Okay. So for our all right. For DC analysis. All right. All right. The only thing that we need at this point, we have to start with DC analysis is to determine the emitter current. Okay. Because our RE equivalent resistance for our emitter is based on the emitter current, which is your 26 mV divided by IE. So kailangan natin yung IE. And this is established by the DC current. Okay. All right. And we remove the capacitors open circuit for zero hertz operation just to establish where the question point of our transistor circuit is. All right. Now again, because this is the voltage divider configuration, we have to find out if approximate analysis is valid or not. Okay. So kagagalig nyo lang ng quiz one, dapat kayan-kayan ninyong gawin yan. All right. So how do we do that again? All right. We calculate beta RE and we compare that to 10 times R2. And so that is 680K. Baka hindi, baka kulang. All right. So but even if it's kulang, we're still going to use approximate analysis. What the hell? All right. Let's just try that. 560 times 150 is how many? Huh? Tika, bakit madian. 560 times 150 kulang nga. Okay. That's only 84. Huh? Wait, wait. 10 times R2 is 68K. Hello? All right. And beta RE is equal to 84K. All right? Okay. So we're good. So approximate analysis is valid. Okay. We can use approximate analysis and establish the question point of the transistor circuit. In this case, there are two things that we need to know actually, which is the emitter current. And the other thing is to determine that the transistor is actually in its active region, which allows us to validate if it will amplify in the first place or not. because if it is not in the active region, if it is cut off or it is saturated, then it's really not going to do anything. right? So VC analysis is important, especially in a quiz where the problem might be sneaky and actually bias the transistor into its saturated region just to catch people and see if they know what they're doing. Maybe the question is like analyze this circuit and calculate its voltage gain. So you go through all the trouble of calculating the voltage gain is going to come up. You come up with this answer and in fact, if you took the time to find out very quickly if it was in the active region or not, then you would have found out that voltage gain is equal to zero. So be careful. So we have to find out and to do that we will do our simple and very quick DC question point calculation. And how do we do that? Again, coming from quiz one, first you establish what your base voltage is, you subtract by 0.7 to get your emitter voltage and therefore establish what your IE is. When you know what your IE is, you will copy that and say that IC is equal to IE, which will allow you to calculate the voltage drop here. And if you can calculate the voltage drop there, then you can calculate your V C and comparing V C versus V E, you'll be able to determine if your transistor is in the active region. How do you know? Well, if there's enough voltage from collector to emitter, all right, such that they are not practically shorted together, then you know that the transistor is in its active region. Okay, so let's try that out. First, calculate V sub B, all right, V sub B in this case, I might be writing this out for no reason at all, maybe the next slide has the answer anyway, all right, 12 times 6.8 over 6.8 plus 22, all right, this looks like an R, but this is actually 12, okay, and so our resulting V sub B in this case is going to be, all right, fortunately, I have my calculator 6.8 divided by 6.8 plus 22 is 0.236, all right, times 12 gives us a 2.83 volts, all right, and so that's our VB that goes here, okay, 2.83 volts, and that allows us to establish V sub E is equal to 2.83 minus 0.7, all right, and that gives us 2.133, okay, all right, 2.133 volts, and that allows us to establish IE, all right, is equal to 2.133 divided by 560 ohms, which gives us a emitter current of 3.81 milliamp amperes, okay, so there's your IE, and because IE is roughly equal to IC, all right, IC is roughly equal to IE, we can say that IC is also equal to 3.81 milliamp amperes. If you want to be more accurate, you can always just factor in the slightly lower current by subtracting the base current from it, okay, all right, so 3.81, that's going to be close enough anyway, and that allows us to calculate the voltage across the 1k, which is very easy to numerically do in your head. Obviously, V sub C is equal to 3.81 volts, and so now that you have that, you have your V sub E from a while ago, you know that it's 2.133 volts, you should be able to get your V sub C, sorry, this is not right, this is not V sub C, this is your V sub RC, all right, V sub RC is 3.81, therefore, V sub C is equal to 12 volts minus 3.81 volts, which is equal to 11.996, okay, and that basically, huh, no, that's not, what did this thing calculate, 12 minus 3.81, okay, is 8.19, sorry about that, okay, 8.19 volts, all right, and we now have our, all right, answer for the question of is the transistor inactive or open or, you know, saturated or open circuit, all right, and so the answer is saturation or cutoff, and the answer is pretty obvious, we have a nice and healthy voltage from collector to emitter, no, we can calculate that and say that the VCE voltage is 8.19 minus 2.133, and that's 6.057, 6.1 volts, okay, rounding it off, so our transistor is definitely in the active region, all right, there is a collector to emitter voltage and there is a collector current, okay, and that means that if you're looking at the active versus cutoff versus saturation curves, all right, here, here, here, you'll see that it is definitely in the middle somewhere, very nicely biased, okay, so transistor is happy, it is ready to do amplification, okay, based on these calculations, so the things that you have to take note of at this point is this, all right, and I sub e, which is this one, keep this in your head, 3.81 milliampere, all right, 3.81 milliampere, is there anything else that we need from here, well, I don't know, but hopefully you'll be able to remember because your brains are supposed to be young and capable at this point, okay, so we're going to clear out the drawings here, we're going to go to the next page, are there any questions before we proceed, I suppose not, so let's just go forward, and, oh, okay, so here we go, yeah, okay, so it was never solved, okay, but we actually calculated VB, IE, and V sub C, we know what the answers are to that, okay, and we can go ahead and now look at the AC equivalent circuit so that we can calculate our transistor performance, all right, so first things first, is you need to know how to convert the circuit into its AC equivalent, okay, so this is important because if you get it wrong, then your equivalent, you know, your calculations will be wrong, okay, so the AC equivalent circuit, again, for simplification purposes, just simply ignores and says that the capacitors are basically equivalent to short circuit, okay, so short circuit, right, we're going to draw that like this, and more importantly, this capacitor is also short-circuited, which means that, as you can see, your AC equivalent says that the emitter of the transistor, the emitter of the transistor is directly connected to ground, okay, the emitter of the transistor is connected to ground under AC conditions, so what does that look like? When you redraw the circuit, all right, when you redraw this circuit to its equivalent AC circuit, this emitter is directly connected to ground, as you can see here, directly connected to ground, okay, supply, which might need a little bit of explaining, although you probably know this already, all right, the supply voltage is also considered to be AC ground, okay, the supply is considered to be AC ground, where the hell does that come from, okay, so just to clarify and make this, you know, more intuitive for you, okay, if we have, if we go back to a totally different discussion before, you may not necessarily remember this, but hopefully you do, okay, not connected to this, okay, try to disengage, go back, all right, go back to some time before, and if I were to ask you a simple enough question to see if you actually can answer, if I wanted to go from an AC signal and come up with a DC voltage, all right, in example, Meralco 220 volts AC, AC, and I wanted to make a DC equivalent, or not equivalent voltage, but I needed a DC 12 volts supply, right, so from 220 volts AC, I need to get a DC 12 volts out, how do I do it, can you try to answer this, please, this has nothing to do with this particular lesson, it's from the past, all right, it's from the past, this term, actually, it's from this term, so how do I make an AC to DC converter, all right, and, okay, so somebody here says full wave rectifier, that's correct, okay, but remember, we need to use something because this is very high voltage, all right, matasang volt tayo rito, ang kailangan lang natin ay 12 volts, okay, nung kailangan, okay, very good, so it's a transformer into a full wave rectifier, all right, transformer, in particular, a step down transformer into a full wave rectifier, there are two ways of building that, but let's use this one, okay, and taking this as the output, what kind of a waveform are we going to get, so our transformer will go from 220 AC down to some lower voltage, okay, something like 9 volts AC, all right, and from 9 volts AC, DC, we rectify this, so that we get this at the output of this circuit, now you'll notice again, as stated earlier, if you might recall, this is a pulsing waveform, it's not continuous DC, so what do we need, well, we need a capacitor, all right, we need a capacitor over here, so that these pulses are used to energize the capacitor, and it will supply the energy, all right, as the rectifier output goes down, all right, so the capacitor takes over in supplying the electricity, and hopefully if we've calculated it right, you're more or less going to get a 12 volt output, all right, now here's the key factor, why did I bring this up, notice that the output of the supply, which will get connected over here, is a capacitor, hopefully hindi nyo nakalimutan yun, all right, the output of the bridge rectifier is connected to a capacitor, okay, and what did we just say about capacitors, a capacitor at AC is the equivalent of a short circuit, okay, all right, capacitors at AC, all right, are effectively short circuits, and you'll notice that this capacitor is connected to ground, and so this is the equivalent, your 12 volt power source is the equivalent of a short to ground at AC, so you'll notice that this 12 volts here is considered to be connected to AC ground, as I just mentioned, so if you were wondering why is it considered to be AC ground, well, because the supply has a capacitor connected to ground, okay, that capacitor was needed to keep the voltage steady from the output of the bridge rectifier, so there's that short to ground due to the capacitor in the power supply, okay, do you understand now, all right, and that's why, that's why, let me just erase everything here because it's getting really messy, all right, that's why this is considered to be AC ground, all right, that's why this is also considered to be connected to ground through this capacitor, so you'll see that here, all right, this AC ground means that this resistor at the collector is connected to AC ground, all right, this emitter is also connected to AC ground, all right, this 6.8k is connected directly to ground, and so that's ground, all right, this 22k goes up here and is connected also to AC ground because it's connected directly to the 12-volt supply, therefore, R1 is connected also to AC ground, and they're all considered to be ground at this point, so this is your equivalent circuit in terms of looking at it at AC, okay, and so now, all right, we connect our equivalent circuit to the signal source, okay, all right, so ito, nangbito lang yan, yan, yan, yan, yon, all right, and the output is taken over here, that's it, that's the model that we're going to be working with for this particular transistor amplifier circuit, maybe, maybe what was missing here would have been the AC signal source, here's your Vs, with an equivalent series resistance sending out its signal, all right, into the transistor amplifier circuit, all right, and so there you go, are there questions so far, are we good, okay, malinaw, all right, so malinaw tayo, so let's go forward, okay, let's go forward, and let's erase some things here, sorry, forgot to erase it, okay, so ano ito, all right, so for the transistor, okay, so BC versus AC beta, never mind that for now, but yes, the AC beta considers, you know, the thing as it's wiggling about, all right, around its skewpoint, you might get a slightly different value for if you were to calculate it based on this, but anyway, whatever it is, it's going to be written there, all right, you use that as your beta for whatever calculations that you need to do, okay, all right, so the thing that we're going to be doing now is calculating, all right, the input, okay, signal, all right, what is the input impedance of the circuit, okay, what is the input impedance of the circuit for these three guys connected in parallel, all right, and that's important because it forms a voltage divider against whatever source resistance there is, which will have the effect of making the signal source amplitude smaller, okay, and that's important because when you try to calculate the voltage gain, the voltage gain is basically equal to VO over VI. Theoretically, all right, if you don't consider the input impedance, the V sub I is basically the amplitude of the signal source, but when you now consider the input impedance and any source resistance, your input signal to the transistor itself will get reduced by voltage divider action, and the result is that the VO, because the transistor sees a smaller input signal, the output signal will become smaller, okay, so it's important to know the input impedance of the circuit, and as you can see, the input impedance is simply equal to the parallel combination of R1, R2, and whatever is the base resistance of the circuit, okay, whatever is the base resistance of the circuit, that's an equivalent of this one, okay, equivalent of having a resistance at the base, and that is essentially a function of the input resistance, which is, or which was shown to you earlier, if you might recall, as being equal to beta times the small r e, all right, so importante yung calculation, you need your AC beta, and you need to multiply this to the emitter resistance equivalent, okay, all right, so there you go with that, so let's try to have a look, okay, we're sort of just taking it a step at a time here, so here it is, all right, the AC equivalent model, with this one, just, you just have to remember, there is your r prime e, or re, for that matter, the equivalent resistance here is r prime e times beta AC, all right, and that basically completes the model, okay, all right, so let's have a look, medyo makulit lang yung drawings dito, all right, and do that calculation, ayan, okay, so inulit-ulit yung mga calculations dito, okay, very briefly switching, just to give you an example, the hybrid pi model, all right, okay, you can extract from the hybrid pi model the r prime e, or re equivalent, never mind, okay, so we've talked about this already, I've already, in fact, all right, if you might recall, stated that the, what's this, the hybrid pi model is better for high frequency calculations, whereas the re model is only good for low frequency kind of simulations or calculations, okay, so never mind that, let's go forward here, okay, and here we go, okay, okay, okay, okay, okay, ito, importante, okay, actually, I've already stated it, but what the hell, okay, so here is the equivalent input resistance, it's equal to beta times re, as I've stated, okay, okay, the AC current is beta IB, all right, the output impedance is basically equal to whatever resistor is at the output, which is from collector to AC ground, okay, and given this, right, we can go ahead and do our calculations, so here is all of that, so number one, okay, number one, the base equivalent resistance is equal to beta AC times re, and re is equal to 26 millivolts divided by iE, all right, the output resistance, as stated earlier, is simply equal to the collector resistor, and whatever this thing might be connected to as the load, whatever the transistor circuit is driving, but if there's nothing there, if it's not really connected to anything, it's not driving anything, then the only output impedance that we're talking about is equal to R sub C, all right, or if you like, you can think of the output impedance ZO as being equal to R sub C in parallel with whatever R load is, okay, and if there is no R load, then you can say that R load is equal to infinity, which means that it's just R sub C by itself, okay, so there you go with that, all right, so let's go forward, okay, and let's do the rest and look at the rest of the calculations here, and it is to say that the voltage gain, all right, which is defined as V out over V in, all right, can be simplified to this calculation, all right, if the transistor is all by itself, all right, if that voltage gain is simply equal to the collector resistor divided by the emitter resistance, that's it, okay, so that emitter resistance calculation is very, very important, okay, the ratio of the collector resistor divided by the emitter resistance gives you the theoretical voltage gain of the transistor alone, okay, all right, so that voltage gain, all right, which is this one, will be modified by, all right, whatever losses there are at the input, which will tend to make the input signal smaller, and whatever losses there are at the output because the output is driving a load resistance, okay, all right, so that's what is being shown here, so the modified voltage gain is a function of this theoretical maximum gain, which is simply equal to rc divided by r, r prime e, all right, modified by how much reduction there is because of the input and output impedances, driving, or being driven by the signal source, okay, all right, so let's try that out, okay, I know that this is kind of in the air right now, so let's try that out, and yes, you're given the following circuit, all right, calculate the emitter current, all right, and from the emitter current, get the equivalent emitter resistance, determine the input impedance, determine the output impedance, and get the voltage gain, okay, and so here are the calculations associated with that, okay, all right, so alam na natin na because we did the DC calculations a while ago, we already know some of these answers, right, so if you might recall, Ie is equal to 3.81 milliampiers, kanina, kinalculate na yan, doon, kinitignan natin, if the transistor is in its active region or not, okay, so let's have a quick look at the rest of the calculations as we see here, okay, all right, so yan, 3.81 milliampiers, and substituting that into the 26 millivolts divided by Ie gives you an equivalent emitter resistance of 6.83 ohms, okay, so this is a figure that is very, very important, okay, 6.83 ohms, okay, from there, all right, from there, we can get our zein because our zein is the parallel combination of R1, R2, and R in, now that R in, all right, R in is equal to, ito pala, why am I rewriting it, R in is equal to AC beta times R in, and we just substitute now because we've just calculated that R in is 6.83 ohms, we multiply this by the AC beta, which is, you know, which was written in the previous slide, it's 160, this gives us a total R in of 1092 ohms, 1.092 kilo ohms, and we parallel that with 22k and 6.8k, all right, so ito 1.092 kilo ohms, okay, and pag pinaralel mo yan, the resulting input impedance is shown to be 902.3 ohms, which is pretty low, all right, this is a fairly low input impedance, which is quite normal for a common emitter configuration where the emitter of the transistor is coupled to ground via a capacitor, okay, so if you have a common emitter circuit where the emitter has capacitor connected to ground, you can expect that the input impedance is going to be fairly low, all right, it's going to be fairly low, and yes, it will be a little bit higher if we have a transistor with a very, very high beta, all right, so itong transistor na to, this is already a decently high amount of beta, 160, but as you know, as you've seen from our lab, we can have transistors, if you're very lucky, your 2N22222 might have a DC beta of 200 plus, right, some of you were calculating 250 or so, and it would be slightly higher, in fact, if you were calculating its AC beta, okay, so given this, your input impedance would be roughly twice as high, maybe as a maximum, so your input impedance might be closer to 2 kilo ohms, but that's still pretty low, okay, that's still pretty low, okay, so there you go with that, I hope that there are no questions so far, are we okay, okay ba tayo, people, nasusundan naman, okay, do we get a thumbs up, any questions, yoohoo, looking for thumbs up, okay, alright, so we go forward, okay, get the output impedance, in this, in this case, the output is not connected anywhere, therefore, the output impedance is simply equal to the collector resistor itself, which is 1 kilo ohm, okay, that's there, and now we get to calculate the voltage gain, alright, so the voltage gain is basically equal to Rc divided by Rc, and Rc is 1 kilo ohm, Rc, we calculated as 6.83 ohms a while ago, and that gives us a voltage gain of 146.41, very, very large voltage gain, alright, alright, so this is a very, very large voltage gain, and now when we factor in the possibility that we have a voltage source which has a finite output impedance, a series impedance of 50 ohms, alright, this 146.41 voltage gain will get reduced because of the fact that our input impedance here, alright, our input impedance will divide, will voltage divide the signal downward, okay, and we can calculate that by simply looking at it as a voltage divider, it's the equivalent of this 902.3 ohms, alright, in parallel here, along with the source, so it forms a voltage divider which basically looks like this, okay, 902.3 ohms, and there is our signal source with an RS equal to 50 ohms, and so we can see that this is a voltage divider, and the voltage division is basically, alright, the V to the base, alright, from the VS, VB is equal to VS multiplied by 902.3 divided by 902.3 plus 50 ohms, which comes from here, right, and that's exactly what this equation is, and basically what happens now is we get a reduction, and we can directly calculate this by multiplying the theoretical voltage gain that we got directly into this ratio of 902.3 divided by 902.3 plus 50, and the result of that is that our new voltage gain, alright, is reduced from 146 to 138. It's a modest enough reduction, it's pretty small, okay, and so, and you may think, okay, maliit lang pala yung effect, eh kasi nga ang source impedance, alright, the source impedance is 50 ohms, which is also very, very low impedance, alright, we're very lucky if we have a source impedance that is that low, okay, alright, so there you go, so if we have this circuit, alright, if we have this circuit and we connect it to a voltage source with an equivalent output impedance of 50 ohms, alright, okay, so based on our calculations, we can expect that this whole circuit that we see here will have a voltage gain of 138, okay, it will multiply the input signal that we see here, say for example, I'm getting a 20 millivolts peak-to-peak signal, okay, if the input is a 20 millivolt peak-to-peak signal, a very, very small signal, alright, 20 millivolts peak-to-peak signal, and I put it through this amplifier, which we've calculated will have a gain of approximately 138, I am going to be able to get an output signal here, it's a reverse in phase, alright, that is basically 2.76 volts peak-to-peak, there we go, alright, alright, so, a very large amount of amplification from a single transistor circuit, okay, because the voltage gain is very high at 138, okay, alright, so there you go, so, small little signal going in, 20 millivolts peak-to-peak, very decently large, 2.76 volts peak-to-peak at the amplifier output, alright, transistors, interesting, they have that ability to amplify, okay, alright, so there you go, isn't that cool, alright, questions, alright, questions, any questions, okay ba tayo, okay, alright, why is the RS 50-O, because that's the example, alright, nakasulat dito, if your source, okay, alright, so let's change the assumption, alright, let's change the assumption, and say that if your source has a source impedance of 600 O, how does this change the calculation, well, you can just substitute it, right, you can just substitute it, so this becomes 600, okay, and as you'll see, because of that, the voltage gain that the whole circuit will produce is significantly reduced, alright, it will be much, much smaller, let's find out by how much, okay, so, nine, I'm gonna try to drop the 0.3, okay, in fact, maybe you just, you know, remove the 902, and I'm just going to type 900 into my calculator, because, yeah, this is stupid, 900 2.3 versus 900, so 900 divided by 900 plus 600, okay, gives us a 0.6 division factor times 146, alright, gives us, alright, the equivalent gain, na wala ang tempo, of just 87.6, alright, so nakita nyo yung malaking difference, okay, so, the source impedance, alright, being low at 50 ohms, means that the input impedance has only a small effect, only a small voltage division, pero kung significant, more significant, and more realistic, in fact, source impedance, mo, okay, at 600 ohms, then the gain drops off quite a lot, okay, got that, now, watch this, alright, this is even worse, think about what is going to happen, okay, think about what would happen if I have a signal source here, alright, and this output of this circuit is connected to another one just like it, okay, what would the overall effect be, alright, what would be the overall effect, so, in other words, this circuit, alright, circuit one, what would happen if you have circuit one connected to another circuit one, a cascade, in other words, so, I have a signal source here going in, what is the expected output signal, alright, how big is the expected output signal, what is the overall voltage gain of such a circuit combined, a cascade of these two guys put together, now, you might be thinking, wow, the voltage gain is going to be humongous, alright, you'd think that the voltage gain is going to be humongous because if the first stage has a gain of about 140 and the second stage has another 140, you'll get a multiplication effect, right, 140 multiplied to 140 is a humongous amount of magnification, well, unfortunately, that's not what's going to happen because your first circuit, so, I like to point this out, alright, your first circuit has this very large voltage gain because you're assuming that this thing is driving nothing, it's driving infinity resistance, but if you put another one just like this here, then what is that the equivalent of? Well, that's the equivalent of having a load resistance of 902.3, ohms, okay? So, you'll see how shitty this turns out to be because this means that the output 1k is driving something which is rated at 902.3, yeah, right, and so what will happen is that because these are almost equal in value, you can see that the voltage gain instead of being 140, is fantastically going to be much, much, much, much lower, okay? All right? And so this is the harsh reality of it. The problem essentially with the common emitter configuration is that output impedance if you have a very high voltage gain configuration circuit, most, if not all of that voltage gain is derived from having a high output collector resistor. resistor. And because the resistor at the collector is fairly high in value, in this particular example, in fact, this is not considered to be a particularly high value, all right? 1k is pretty low as an output resistor value, but you can see that it does not have the ability to drive any form of low impedance, all right? Because a low impedance just crunches down all of that voltage gain, all right? Okay, so you can try doing the calculations and see how terrible this is. And so because it's 9 o'clock, all right, it's 9 o'clock, can we just very quickly go through this one, okay? Please take a quick snapshot of this if you like and try it out, okay? So duplicate the circuit in LTSpice, okay, using a dot model statement for the transistor setting the BF to the required value, all right? So redo the calculation with an AC and DC beta of 200, and then, all right, try duplicating this in LTSpice and see what kind of voltage gain that you get. Will LTSpice produce the same result with a 1 kHz sine wave, all right, 15 mV amplitude, how do you get the voltage gain? you look at the output amplitude of your simulation, get its peak-to-peak value, and divide that by the input amplitude, and see what voltage gain that you get. Is it close to the hand calculations that you did using the RE model or not? And what you're going to get is that it's not that close, but you get a ballpark figure, more or less the same, hopefully. And it's out by a factor of 1.2 or so, all right? And insert the source resistance of 50 ohms, and again, you can play around with this. What happens if you make it 600 ohms? What happens if you, you know, and of course, you can also try and do this calculation. What happens if I have two of these amplifier circuits put together? All right? And you'll find out a lot of things about these transistor circuits. Okay? All right. So, unfortunately, I have to stop here. We'll get back into this, you know, in the next meeting where, hopefully, there are no more disruptions and we'll be face to face. Okay? So, thank you. yeah, before we go, are there any questions? I hope there's none, I suppose. All right. Wala! Okay. So, kung wala, wala! Oy, wala ba talaga? Thumbs up. Kailangan. man! Okay. Sige. So, thank you for joining us and I'll see you again next time. Goodbye! Goodbye! Peace.
