okay okay mic test um hang on let's have a look oh great i can't even see what's going on here um um um you're recording and uh let's have a quick look i don't know for some reason um i can't see the participants which is really weird but what the heck all right uh going over to chat okay so because i can't see the participants list i really can't see any of the emoticons that might come out all right so if you have a question through today's lecture um um there's no way to let me know except via chat and uh well if you turn on your video camera but or unmute so i can hear you all right so let me just uh verify hang on uh output is on the wrong port again okay okay let's try this that should do it that should do it tiger lake audio controller plus speaker and headphones okay that should channel it through hopefully um all right so as i said um um let's try to get back on track here uh i apologize for the large amounts of time wasted as you can see i'm wearing a i look weird with this thing but i really don't have any choice so i'm i'm not going to turn on my video um and let's try to get back to where we left off last time uh slideshow from the current slide uh and um okay okay okay okay okay okay okay hang on okay um and let me just try to capture this now uh uh zoom meeting ah jesus christ and uh we want to be looking at the slideshow here we go drag this out of the way okay so uh i think everybody can see this properly i hope and um let's uh try to get back on track here uh we we did uh basically um stop here uh well no we stopped a couple of pages down so this is just a quick reminder essentially of uh where we have been okay so we've seen applications of jfets so here's one this is basically again impedance matching okay so this is uh all good and um we've also looked at the application where the jfets is used as a switch or uh in a more extended viewpoint the jfet here is being used as a still as a switch but you know switching and connecting several different signal sources and of course you can do this on the opposite side of things as well um um so you have what we call this an analog multiplexer and the inverse of that is the demultiplexer okay and finally we looked at the jfet as a current source or sink due to its inherent um current limiting once it gets to its uh idss value all right okay so those are the applications we've looked at so far and last time when we broke off um we were here at the enough of the kids stuff uh all right okay so um what is this about all right so this is an extended uh application that is the uh uh uh uh uh Okay. And I'd like to basically you to look at this problem here. So the problem essentially is that we'd like to have or build a weighing scale. Okay. A digital weighing scale for that matter. Right. And it has to handle a maximum load of 200 kilograms. Right. With a measurement accuracy, a.k.a. resolution of 0.1 kilograms. Okay. So the thing that if there's any need to clarify what exactly this means. Okay. Is that. Okay. The obvious thing here is the maximum weight limit. So essentially, we don't expect that the weighing scale should basically be required to handle anything above 200 kilograms. That's the upper limit. Anything beyond 200 kilograms, we can't guarantee as to what it will do. Okay. Okay. Okay. If it gets destroyed, well, that's the fault of whoever is using it. So 200 kilograms is the upper limit. Okay. Now, when you talk about the weighing scale, of course, particularly a digital one, you expect that, you know, you'll be able to see and read your weight as digital numbers displayed somewhere. And, you know, if 200 kilograms is the upper limit, you know, we're talking here of a weighing scale that's probably designed for weighing, you know, people, right? It's for people and anything that is within that weight limit. And so the point here that we're trying to put is that, you know, this accuracy or resolution for that matter, which I'm loosely, what's this, saying that they're pretty similar in meaning at this point, although technically speaking, they're not, right? Technically speaking, they're not the same. So take it to mean that we want a resolution of 0.1 kilogram or another way of expressing this is to say that, you know, the display that you expect to see increments or decrements in steps of 0.1 kilogram. Okay. Okay. So I don't think you'd like a weighing scale if that only has, you know, a resolution of 1 kilogram. Okay. So if your resolution, for example, is 1 kilogram, it basically means that if you weigh 60.7 kilos, right, if you have to weigh 60.7 kilos, it will only do something like maybe display a 61. All right. All right. And if you gained weight, it would not change. All right. Anything from your current weight all the way up to 61.49999 will probably register exactly the same thing, 61. So a one kilogram resolution, right, is not good. All right. All right. All right. Which is why, you know, we want a 0.1 kilogram resolution so that it will be able to display your weight like so. And if you gained or lost 100 grams, you know, you indulge during Christmas or whatever, it will show up. Okay. It will not be happily putting out exactly the same reading, whereas, in fact, you had gained or lost weight. Okay. All right. So this is what this implies. Okay. So 0.1 kilogram resolution or accuracy or step size. Okay. Which means, again, that you should be able to see 60.1, 60.2, 60.3, and so on and so forth. 60.9 and then 61.0 and so on and so forth. Okay. Now, the scale is going to be or that measurement system, that physical device plus, you know, whatever measures the actual weight, right, needs to produce some kind of an electronic signal, an electrical signal that goes into an Arduino. Most of you are familiar with this, if not all, okay, which takes care of changing that analog signal, all right, into a display where you can see, all right, what your weight reading happens to be. All right. So it's the Arduino that manages to output over to the LCD screen. We expect that the measuring device, the weighing scale itself, produces an output analog signal, which is proportional, all right, proportional to the weight of whatever is being weighed. Okay. All right. So hopefully that's clear. And again, I can't see if people will give a thumbs up here, unfortunately. So I'm just going to have to assume that that is going to be. I don't know if it comes out in the group chat. All right. So let's just try this out. Can you produce and hit the thumbs up, please? And let's just see if I can actually see it somewhere if it registers. Parang wala. Okay. That's sad. Okay. I don't know, Haru, how I'm going to be able. May lumalabas dito actually sa participants. So I can't see the individual participants, but I can see an emoticon count happening. So I guess that should do or is there some weird setting here? I don't get it. I don't know what the bug is with the software. Must be an incompatibility, meaning that I need to update my Zoom. Okay. Anyway. So let's go forward. So hopefully this is clear. All right. And let's go on to the next page. Space bar. Doesn't want to go on to the next page. Ayan. All right. So now this 200 kilograms with 0.1 kilogram accuracy, or again, maybe the better term is resolution. We can't really guarantee that it's accurate, the 0.1 kilogram. Means that we have 2,000 steps. Okay. So I've just explained this. Hopefully you get the idea. All right. So where did that 2,000 steps come from? Well, if you start from 0.0 and then 0.1, which is your kilograms, all right, your step size, 0.2 kilograms, and so on and so forth until you reach 199.9 kilograms, all right? If you count this, this is going to be 2,000 representations, all right? This is going to be 2,000 steps or increments. Okay? And in terms of, you know, digital resolution, all right? Digital resolution, you're going to, which you should know about because this is CCI comp, all right? This is CCI comp stuff. So I think you know about this stuff. This means that you need to have a device, all right, which is part of the Arduino that basically does an analog. Remember that the output of our system is some kind of voltage that is proportional to the weight. The greater the amount of weight, the higher the voltage is produced. So we need something that converts that voltage into digital form so that the Arduino can manipulate that digital representation, the digital word, and output it to the LCD, right? So this device is called an analog to digital converter. And that ADC or analog to digital converter has to have a word size of 11 bits. And how did we calculate 11 bits? Well, 11 bits is 2 raised to the 11, right? It's 2,048, which is greater than, all right? Sorry. Which is greater than the required number of steps or representations, all right? Which means that that matches very well. It has to have the inherent number of representations to handle basically how many decisions, distinct values you need to have. And we know that the number of distinct values that we have is 2,000. So 11 bits is just slightly over that. There are enough representations available on an 11-bit analog to digital converter to encompass all of the digits that we want to show, okay? Or that we want to digitize for that matter, okay? Now, for those who are familiar with the Arduino, you know that internally, the Arduino, the heart of the Arduino is an ATmega328 microcontroller. And unfortunately, the analog to digital converter in an ATmega328 is only 10 bits in resolution, aka word size. And this is not uncommon, all right? A lot of the microcontrollers sport an analog to digital converter. If it even has one, that is only 10 bits, all right? This is pretty much higher for course. And so unfortunately, this means that the built-in analog to digital converter of the Arduino cannot actually represent all the steps needed because 2 raised to the 10th is only 1024, which would mean that if you wanted to use it for displaying a weight of 0 to 200 kilograms, you'd need to drop this accuracy representation or its resolution to about 0.5 kilogram steps, right? Tama ba? Hindi, 0.2, sorry. 0.2, where's my head, all right? 0.2 kilogram steps, which, you know, is still actually pretty much acceptable. But it's rather awkward for us humans because it would mean that, you know, when you look at your digits of display, you know, you'd be going from 60.2, tapos walang 60.3, magiging 60.4, tapos magiging 60.6, all right? So nothing in between there, which is, I think, going to be a little bit awkward for people who, you know, will be wondering, bakit walang in between? Okay, that's just our nature, our brain. So again, this default characteristic is not going to work. That's why it can't do it. Ha ha ha. Now, on the other hand, the reality of it really is that if you know a few tricks up your sleeve and you know how to work with microcontrollers and their programmability and this ABC for that matter, all right, there is a technique that will allow you to actually get 11 bits of resolution from a 10-bit ABC. But it's beyond the scope of this particular subject. So if you want to learn more about that in the future, you may decide if the course is even offered in the future, you may decide to take my elective course on microcontrollers and their applications. Because if you do, then you'll find out how that's done. But I'm pretty sure that if you search over at Google, then maybe it will give you the correct answer. I don't know. All right? Anyway, so having said that, let's go forward. So for the moment, given this limitation, okay, let's assume that you're smart, all right, and you know your way around embedded systems programming, and you know how to handle this inherent limitation of the Arduino, all right, and you also know how to program it so that you take the reading from your analog to digital converter in the Arduino and output it to an interface LCD. Now, you can easily buy, what's this, a 2x20, I think, all right, LCD display that produces, you know, a text readout, all right? And this is a favorite output interface to the Arduino. They're easily available and they're quite inexpensive. So it's pretty easy to create, you know, and put out a digital value inclusive of other text and whatever. So we're not going to cover that, okay? Our focus for now is that how are we going to actually produce the device or a collection of devices or whatever that allows a person to interface to that and produce, you know, an output signal, which is proportional to the weight of that person, okay? In other words, what kind of a sensor can you use to actually measure up to a maximum of 200 kilograms? I mean, you could have a sensor that has capability of handling 500 kilograms. It doesn't matter, all right? But the limit of the application is 200 kilograms. Obviously, you can't use a sensor or system that has an upper limit of 100 kilograms. Hindi pwede kasi out of spec yun, okay? So you need the sensor that can handle at least 200 kilograms and produce the output resolution required. In other words, its output is fine enough such that it can actually produce those very small increments in output that represent 0.1 kilograms of increase or decrease in weight, okay? So that's the question. What sensor and physical arrangement can you think of, all right, that will provide you with a viable output so that your Arduino with its LCD display can be used to output that particular reading? And if you can manage to figure that out, then, well, you now have a very viable digital weighing scale. Of course, you may argue at this point na, nabibili naman, sir, yung digital weighing scale. Yeah, I know. But, you know, you want to make it yourself or maybe this is a special application or whatever. So, and of course, you know, you can scale this, you can change the parameters or whatever as long as you know the basic principles of how to do it. But bottom line is, ano ang pwede mong gamitin? Okay? So this, again, as you can see, it says here, pause and wait for people to answer. And so that's exactly what I'm doing right now. You can choose to unmute or you can basically just put it up here in chat. You can broadcast it to everybody or you can just do a direct message to me. I should be able to see it. Let me just check that this thing is working. Hello. Okay. And not locked up. So waiting for you people. Can you think of a technology or sensor, if you, all the better, if you can give me a direct answer, that can actually do this job? What do you think? And I am, you know, suggestions. Questions. Let's see if you can sort of come up with something. Anybody looking over? Okay. Unfortunately, as I said, I can't see the participants. I think I should be able to see you only if I stop the share. So I'm just going to put it here on chat so that you can see. So it's 200 kilograms, 0.1 kilogram resolution. Okay. Output. Output. Oops. Wrong spelling. Output. Proportional. What's wrong with me today? Voltage. Proportional to the wave. Okay. What sensor can you think of? How? Okay. So that's the question over here on the chat. And I'm going to stop share just so that I can see you guys. Okay. So we have about 13 people here. And okay. So you can raise your hand. You can sort of turn on your video camera if you want so I can see you. Okay. And waiting for people to try to give me an answer. Anong suggestions? Anybody? Yoohoo. Hello. I try nga natin to. Can I see, can you put a thumbs up right now? Because I'm in the Zoom meeting view window. I can see the thumbs up now individually. Okay. Very good. Sige. Okay. So suggestions. What kind of a sensor can you think of? Anybody? Wala. As in totally blank. Aba. Aba. Eh, paano kayo magiging, you know, hardware engineer niyan? Kung ganto lang, nakatirik na kayo. You can think, you need to suggest. Alright? Load cell. Ang galing naman ni, ano, Gabriel. Okay. Yes. A load cell will definitely be viable. In fact, that's exactly what we're going to be discussing. But before we high off in that direction and give you a better idea of what the hell a load cell is, what other technologies can you think of? And I'll give you a hint. You've seen digital weighing scales, no? They're all over the place right now. They're not even that expensive. You can buy one. We have one in the house. And I made sure that I got a unit that would serve our needs. No? It's a small unit with an upper limit of five kilograms only. Alright? But I made sure that that particular weighing scale could weigh down to something like, you know, a claimed one gram or something like that. Alright? So, can't guarantee the absolute accuracy. Alright? I think it's even subgram. So, five kilogram upper limit and resolution of one gram. In fact, it displays a sub one gram. Although I can't say that it's particularly reliable when it comes to that. So, is it using a load cell? No, it isn't. Okay? How do I know? Because I've opened it and I've had a look at it. Load cells are not cheap. Alright? Load cells are not that cheap. They're currently reasonably priced, but you don't put that kind of a technology into a mass produced, you know, system. It's not viable. And, of course, manufacturers of these things will try to make them as inexpensive as possible so that they can make a good profit. So, is there any other way you can think of? And this is really a question of trying to see if you have the, what would you call it? Ingenuity, perhaps. Alright? The ingenuity to sort of think within and outside of the box for that matter. See what you can put together. Okay? So, the hint maybe that I can give you is that it does not necessarily have to be a sensor that directly produces or uses the physical inputs as required. So, you're trying to measure weight, right? But perhaps the sensor that you employ does not directly measure the weight. It could be measuring something else. And through an arrangement of the sensor and other things will wind up producing what you seek to measure. Okay? Now, a load cell is pretty special because indeed it is exactly that. It's designed to actually compress, okay? Actually to bend. and that bending because of the weight produces a direct output. Well, almost direct output for that matter. Capacitive sensors. Okay. Huh? That's interesting. So, yes, maybe. How would you use a capacitive sensor? So, when you talk about a capacitive sensor, its capacitance changes with what? Exactly. Okay. So, there are many different classes of capacitive sensors, including, for example, the touch screen that you have on your phone. All right? The touch screen that you have on your phone is a capacitive sensor. sensor. So, that's very generic. Okay? So, if ever anything, how would you use a capacitive sensor to actually do it? What do you have in mind? This answer came from Sophia. So, Sophia, how would you use the capacitive sensor? I'm not saying that it's wrong, but, you know, I have no idea how you'd use it. So, it's how you arrange things and how you'd put it together. So, maybe you have an idea of how it's done or how you do it? Right? Not really sure. Okay. Sige. All right. So, I'll give you guys an example. All right? I'll give you guys an example. Let me just try to erase this right now. How do I erase this? Paizo. A paizo. Sige. Here's another suggestion from Gabriel. Oh, Gabriel, sige. If you say paizo, how would you use the paizo? How would you use the paizo? paizo? Yeah. We did discuss paizo a while ago, like this one here, okay? When we talked about the transducer. So, if you decide to use a paizo, how would you do it? Okay. Ah, wait. I'm not sharing the screen pala. But, yeah, we talked about paizo the other day, right? It was, you know, as a transducer, you put in electricity, it produces, you know, a sound. And if you stress it, it will produce a voltage, okay? But, it can produce a large enough voltage it can use as someone applies on the scale. Okay. All right. So, the problem with paizo technology, is that it is an AC output technology. It does not produce a DC signal. In other words, if you want a paizo to actually produce any output, you have to continuously stress it. That's why when you hit the paizo material, when you hit the paizo material, it produces a momentary high voltage output. Okay. But, if you take, for example, a pair of pliers or whatever, and you squeeze the thing continuously, only the initial squeeze will actually produce an output. Okay. Only the initial squeeze will actually produce an output. And, even if you continue to squeeze it, the output will go back down to zero. okay. So, as a device for a weighing scale, that's not going to work because when you step on it, it's like squeezing it, it will produce a momentary output, and then it will disappear. And so, you know, you can't really use that, right? You can't really use that. Okay. Time-of-flight sensor and a spring. Okay. Time-of-flight sensor and a spring. So, you're measuring distance. Okay. You're measuring distance based on spring compression. Okay. So, here's your sensor. All right. Here's your sensor. And when you step on the weighing scale, it will come closer. All right. And you're measuring that distance using time-of-flight. Okay. Usually, this is using ultrasonics. No. So, your ultrasonics will emit a chirp. The ultrasonic energy travels at the speed of sound, which is finite. All right. Hits the other side and bounces back. And you measure how long it takes from the moment that you send out that signal up to the time that it comes back. And that is proportional to the distance traveled. Of course, divide by two. You divide the time by two because it had to travel upward and then come back down. Yes, that's a distinct possibility. All right. Either you use ultrasonics or you use some other thing like laser or light. All right. The problem basically with those technologies is that the resolution is very poor. Your weighing scale movement for 200 kilograms is very tiny. Right? It's very, very tiny. So, if, for example, you say that you're willing to depress the scale by, say, for example, you know, one centimeter or even two centimeters for that matter at 200 kilograms, 200 kilograms will compress the springs so that the movement is two centimeters. To be able to get a resolution of 0.1 kilogram means that you need to be able to resolve an extremely small physical movement. Now, can your type of light sensor actually handle that and give an accurate consistent result? I'm not sure. Okay? So, maybe. All right? Maybe. That's a good suggestion, but you'll have to try it out. All right? And so, yeah. So, all of these possibilities, all right, all of these possibilities are interesting and you might succeed with a little bit of engineering ingenuity to actually get it to work. Okay? So, I think those are good enough inputs. I'll throw my, what's this? I'll throw my non-workable idea, all right? I'll throw my non-workable idea in just to give you a perspective here that, you know, if you try to think out of the box, you might come up with something for all we know, all right? So, based on the same idea, if we have a platform that somebody is expected to stand on and a set of springs, you can turn a weight on it such that you get compression. And so, for, what's this? Who is this? Louis' idea, if you have a time-of-flight sensor, you can actually measure the distance and get a reading, right? So, that's one way of doing it. Now, time-of-flight sensors are possibly a little bit more expensive. So, my idea is a little bit simpler. If you take your potentiometer from the laboratory, okay, remember that this can be made, that this can be used to produce voltage division, right? This can be used to produce voltage division. And we tie this potentiometer over, all right, to a pivot. up, so that when this thing moves down, we get an angular movement, all right? So, this connection here allows the angular or the vertical displacement to be turned into a rotational force, all right? and so what happens now is that, of course, your resistance voltage division produces a different voltage, okay? so this is basically pretty much the same concept, except that it's a lot simpler and it does not involve materials that you're not and sensors, open, close quote, that you are not familiar with, right? And so, will this work? Honestly, in the mechanical sense of the word world, maybe, right? There are issues with doing it this way because you get what you call as backlash. All right? But conceptually, there you go. So, it's a very simple thing, right, that has the possibility of working. In the real world, as a person who sort of has exposure in interfacing and doing things like this, such an approach is going to be extremely difficult to get to work properly. It's going to be pretty horrible. So, it's actually not a good idea. Okay? But there it is. There's another, as I said, way of doing it which you possibly could have suggested. What's another one? Well, okay, so here's another one. If you're insistent on that Paizo approach, you can do something like, this is stupid. This is not going to work probably in real life. But the problem, as I said with Paizo, is that it needs continuous changing stresses to actually register and produce an output. So, you might take advantage of this configuration, okay, where you have a spring, and as you step on this structure, you will have what we call as a mass and spring combination. All right? And again, using physics, a mass and spring combination has what you call as a resonant frequency. All right? For a particular spring compression characteristic and a weight that you have, which is the mass, there will be a natural resonant frequency such that if you step on it, all right, it will actually undulate like so and dampen out and eventually settle down, okay, due to frictional forces among other things, right? So, the key here is not to look at where it settles down because that's going to be nothing on the paizo, but to look at this one because here, your stress to the paizo is going up and down and it is this frequency that tells you how much mass there is because the spring compression characteristic is constant, okay? so, if you see the frequency, if the mass is very big, M, okay, the undulations will have a lower frequency and if you have a small mass, small M, okay, your undulations will be of a higher frequency. So, the key here is to look at the frequency and allow this with the required mathematical formula of mass and spring tension, all right, to tell you what the mass is. okay, so, F and S, basically, to tell you how much mass there is and based on that, your Arduino calculates this formula and produces the required output. So, in this case, what you are going to have to be able to very, very carefully measure is the period of the oscillation, okay? Will that work? Well, definitely, that's a possibility because microcontrollers, which are digital logic devices, are very good at timing, right? They have built-in peripherals that are very good at resolving time. And so, among all of the technologies here that we've discussed so far, all right, this one actually has the best possibility, technology, but it requires a very, very significant tinkering to ensure that you are able to really get the period because you have to be able to do this before it dies out, all right? And that signal is not necessarily going to be particularly visible because of the fact that, you know, the expectation and the characteristics of this platform will mean that you really don't want it to be oscillatory too much because it will make people dizzy, right? So there has to be a natural damping that reasonably dies out in a certain amount of time, and this is your only window to get those periodic zero crossings to be able to get your calculation to find out how much mass there is that went in. Okay? So that's the idea. Those are the many different possible ideas that could have come about, and hopefully that rounds up your information on how to do it. Okay? So going back, however, all of these are probably too much stress, all right? There's too much stress involved, mentally speaking, and mechanically speaking. So we can, in fact, go back to the original suggestion, which is to use what is called as a load cell. And let's go over to that. Okay? So a load cell is a sensor that directly measures, you know, displacement due to the stress of the weight. Okay? So the basic idea here is that it is a solid sensor, which is why it's easy to make a load cell that handles a tremendous amount of weight. all right? But they are not cheap. Okay? They're not cheap. This is the same technology, in fact, that is used to weigh those freight trucks. Because there's a tariff associated with that on how heavy the load is. All right? And those are much heftier sensors. They are designed and look like a puck. Look like a puck. If you're familiar with the Amazon device that you can talk to to make your orders. Okay? It looks a little bit like that. You have basically four of them. And each one of these might be rated to handle something like 5,000 kilograms or more. All right? So, it's easy to find load cells that handle a lot of weight. And 200 kilograms is on the small side. All right? It's on the small side of things. It's harder to find a load cell that handles low weights like 200 kilograms. Okay? But unfortunately, they're not cheap. So, what's in it? Well, or what is it made of? Well, if you look at this, you can see that it's a piece of aluminum. All right? It's a block of aluminum with a hole. And that's it. That's the idea. If you bolt this thing down on a solid, surface, an unmoving solid surface, okay, and you put weight, a mass, on one, on the other side, this solid looking aluminum will actually bend ever so slightly. And that very, very, very small amount of bending, all right, it has to be small because you are relying on the characteristics of the material here, the metals resiliency, right, such that when you remove the mass, it's supposed to bounce back to where it was before. Now, pretty obviously, if you overdo it, it will just crumple, and that's the end of your sensor. If it ever gets beyond that point where it cannot bounce back to what it was, you've destroyed the sensor. That's why there is a weight limit, essentially. So this thing is designed in such a way that it can handle 200 kilograms, bend right along with it, and when you remove 200 kilograms, it will go back to where it was before. Okay? You go beyond 200 kilograms, it may not go back to where it was before. That's it. Okay? So anyway, so here it is. That's the solution. Unfortunately, it's not that cheap, but it will definitely work. Okay? Now, what is the characteristic of a load cell? All right? How do you use it? Putol yung picture, okay? But it's basically a sensor that requires electricity and produces an output. Okay? So if we look over here, these are the characteristics. All right? So it's basically a lump of metal where inside the structure, there are a bunch of flexible resistors that are arranged in such a way that when the flexible resistor bends, okay, so from straight, all right, from straight like so, it bends, okay, it will bend. And when the thing bends, the resistance changes. Okay? Now, the thing with these is that the effect of that is extremely small. You cannot go beyond a certain small, small, small amount of bending because, number one, the metal will not be able to snap back to where it was before. Okay? Now, look at it. So here are the characteristics of that particular load cell which I just copied from the data sheet. Okay? The rated load is 200 kilograms. That's how far it will go as far as weight handling is concerned. The thing that you need to look at very carefully here is the sensitivity. Okay? It says 2.0 plus minus 0.05 millivolts per volt. Okay? What the hell does that mean? Just keep it in mind for now. 2.0 millivolts per volt. Okay? What the hell does that mean? We'll find out soon. All right? Zero balance is plus minus 1% full scale. Temperature coefficient is 0.05% of full scale which basically means at 0.05% it means that this sensor is fairly well compensated to produce an output that is consistent even if the ambient temperature around it changes. This is what the TCO is. Temperature coefficient. Okay? So, this is just how much will the sensor drift if the temperature where it's working at changes from 30 degrees to 40 degrees. Okay? Something like that. So, it's a small change. It's tolerable. Okay? It has an input resistance of 350 plus minus 20 ohms and an output resistance of exactly the same thing. 350 plus minus 5 ohms. This is fairly low resistance. Okay? And you might be wondering why resistance? Well, because internally it's a bunch of resistors. Okay? That's why it has that resistance rating. Insulation resistance, it's just you know, from the flexible resistors over to the aluminum block, is there any resistance at all? This should be infinite. Alright? This should be infinite. It means that the resistors are not connected to the aluminum block. Okay? And you'll notice that it does have a very, very high insulative resistance. Okay? Safe overload is 150% full scale, which means that it will handle up to 300 kilograms without breaking. Okay? It is a safe overload. So, yes, pwede mong lampasan yung 200 kilos. Huwag mo lang, huwag na huwag na huwag mo lang lalampasan ang 300. Now, you must remember that, you know, when you step on this scale, that initial step might include momentum. Alright? And so, that momentum is additive to that 200 kilograms. so, don't push and say that, oh, malaki naman yung overload capacity. That's there so that the momentum, even at maximum weight, does not destroy the sensor. Okay? That's why it's created that way. Don't abuse. Alright? Now, here's the other interesting stuff. If you're not familiar with load cells, there is an excitation voltage. The recommended is 10 to 15 volts. That has to do with this, the sensitivity rating. Okay? The operating temperature range is minus 20 to plus 80 degrees. So, it's very hardy. Alright? And the cable, as you can see, input is red and black, output is green and white. That's why it's our favorite because it has LaSalle colors. Okay? So, what the hell does this mean? Okay? So, if it's not yet clear to you, it means that a load cell requires power. Okay? That's the input. Kailangan yan ng kuryente para umandar. Okay? Ah, ilan volts? Eh, ang recommended ay 10 to 15 volts DC na sundan mo yung polarity. Okay? And, it will output a voltage on its green and white wires that is proportional to the weight that you put on it. Alright? Alright? But, how much output voltage will it produce? Well, that's what the sensitivity rating is all about and that is what the operating input voltage is all about. So, that 2.0 millivolts per volt here, the volts here refers to how many volts you input into it and how many millivolts it will output at full weight. Okay? Now, look at that rating. Okay, so how is this supposed to be interpreted? Ganto lang yan. Okay? Ang ibig sabihin nun, pag ang pinasok ko rito ay 10 volts. Alright? If my input voltage, the power that I supply to it is 10 volts. Alright? It will mean that the sensor will output 20 millivolts if you put a weight of 200 kilograms on it. Okay? 20 millivolts at 200 kilograms. Ibig sabihin nun, kung 100 kilos ang linagay mo, ang output ng sensor natin ay 10 millivolts lang. Kung 50 kilos ang linagay mo, ang output ng sensor natin ay 5 millivolts lang. Okay? Now, isipin mo, kung 50.1 kilos ang timbang, ibig sabihin nun, you're going to get 5.01 millivolts as the output. Okay? And if you put in a weight of 50.2 kilograms, you expect to get 5.02 millivolts as the output. So, 0.01 millivolts ang change ng voltaje per 100 grams. in other words. Okay? 0.01. So, this is a very, very, very, very, very small voltage to work with. All right? It's an extremely small voltage to work with. So, in fact, the slides that come out, all right, here, explain this. 2.0 millivolts per volt times 10 is equal to 20 millivolts if you put a weight of 200 kilos. Okay? Now, what we're going to see here is that we need to amplify this very, very small voltage because the Arduino's analog to digital converter, all right, has a maximum input of 3.3 volts. Okay? We need to maximize the Arduino's analog to digital converter. So, our output from our sensor system must reach 3.3 millivolts when we put a weight of 200 kilograms. Okay? In other words, pag ang sensor output natin 20 millivolts, we need to amplify it so that the output signal going into the Arduino becomes 3.3 volts. And, of course, proportionately speaking, if we have a weight of 100 kilos, this is going to be 10 millivolts, and the voltage that has to go into our Arduino is going to be, well, 3.3 volts divided by 2, which is about 1.65 volts or so. All right? So, our Arduino just picks up that voltage, does a digital conversion, and magically, through the wonders of programming, will output it to the LCD as an equivalent kilograms. That's the idea. But now there's that challenge. How do you get an amplification factor that goes from here to the required voltage? Let's calculate that. Okay? By the way, before I continue, is everybody understanding this? All right? Nasusundan ba ninyo yung discussion? All right? Can you give a thumbs up, please? I can't even see the thumbs up. What na yan? All right? Meron. Tatlo. Okay. Apat. Okay. Sige. Six, seven. Thank you. All right? So, let's calculate the required amplification factor. Okay? All right? And when you take 3.3 and divide it by 0.020, you get an amplification factor of 165. All right? Now, 165, you think about it, that doesn't sound like, you know, a very large factor. All right? But, here's the thing. The amplification factor doesn't look too big, but, you have to be able to resolve 0.1 kilogram. So, 0.1 kilogram out of 200 kilograms is 0.005 times 20 millivolts, which is just 10 microvolts. what does this mean? It means that your amplifier has to have a voltage gain of 165, but it must be guaranteed not to produce any drift at all. All right? its output voltage must not change through external influences like temperature, bias drift, cue point change, such that its output must not change by more than 10 microvolts. because if it changes by more than 10 microvolts, that's already a change in the digital reading. Okay? So, kung kanina iniisip ninyo, ay, 165, halos kaya na niya ng common emitter amplifier, di ba? Because our common emitter amplifier, we calculated, has a gain of about 125. That's almost 165. So, maybe with a little tweaking, we can get it to reach 165. Yes, maybe you might be right. Maybe we can put two stages to get much more gain than that. It's easy for us to achieve 165. But remember the problem. You just worked on this last lab meeting. The cue point, okay, drifts with temperature and look at how much it drifted. Regardless of which approach you looked at, emitter stabilized, voltage divider stabilized, ! So, collector feedback stabilized, ! all of those approaches produced a cue point drift of several millivolts at the very least. Remember when you heated it up with the 5 watt resistor? The cue point changed by at least 0.5 volts, regardless of which approach. Now, here is your error budget. Your drift budget is only 10 microvolts. So, none of these approaches are really going to work as is. Okay? How can you make an amplifier that has a gain of 165 and a drift of less than 10 microvolts? Isipin ninyo, kung umabot tayo ng 10 microvolts na drift, nag-register na yan as a plus 1 or minus 1 doon sa weighing scale reading. So, dapat less than. Okay? Hindi pwedeng yung equal to. Dapat less than 10 microvolts. In fact, ideally, the drift should be 5 microvolts or less. Okay? Bakit 5? Kasi kalahati na yun eh, nung error budget. Pwede na tayo tumalon ng reading dahil doon. Okay? Alright? Do you get it, people? Alright? Naintindihan? So, paano tayo gagawa ng amplifier na ganyan kataas ang game at ganyan ka stable? So, that is the challenge. Gets nyo? Alright? So, here, now, can you think of a way of doing it? Anybody? Okay? Mahirap, no? Okay? So, this is not an easy challenge. That's why it's called a challenge, right? It's not a simple approach that you have. It's a fairly high engineering challenge to do this. Okay? So, let's see. Okay? It's not hard to design an amplifier with high gain and no drift. Okay? If the signal that you want to amplify is an AC signal, okay, walang problema. Kayang gawin yan kung AC yung signal. ang problema rito is it is a DC signal. The output of the sensor is a DC signal. You step on the thing, it produces an output that goes from 0 to 20 millivolts as a steady output. Here is a person who is 100 kilos. He stepped on it and the output of that sensor is going to be a steady signal. It is DC. Because it's DC, it's a steady signal, the expected amplifier has to amplify it by a factor of 165 with a drift less than 5 microvolts. which makes it difficult to do. On the other hand, if you were trying to design an amplifier that has a gain of 165 and a drift of less than 5 microvolts, it's possible to do it if the signal were AC. But it's not. So how do you manage this? And I have to go forward. I won't let you well, you should be thinking about it. I can't provide the time for you to think about it because it's 845 now. So the signal that we need to amplify is DC. We can do the amplification if it were AC. So the obvious solution is we need to convert the DC signal to an AC signal so that we can amplify it properly and then we have to go make it back into a DC signal so that the Arduino can pick it up and convert it into a digital readout. So that's the trick. From a DC signal to an AC and amplify and back to a large DC signal. Small DC signal AC amplify zero drift back to an amplified large DC signal with no drift. Okay? Alright? AC amplify by a factor of 165 with zero drift. Alright? And go back and make it a DC signal much larger by a factor of 165 without having the penalty of a drift. If you can come up with a system to do this. Okay? So how are you going to do that? How are you going to do that? That's the big question. Okay? Alright. So anybody can you think of a way to actually do this? Ayan. Okay? Ayan yung process. O isipin nyo kaya bang gawin yan? Alright? What is the chain of signal conditioning? This is by the way the technical term for this is signal conditioning. Okay? And that is why you're here. This is why you're in CSE. This is the meat of being a CSE. Because this is your signal from your sensor. Alright? Going into your signal conditioning. chain. Alright? Signal conditioning chain going into your micro controller which does the rest of the magic. Okay? And micro controller is all about programming. And so this is something that you basically know how to do in a certain way. Because you can program in high level language. You know how to write program in C. Alright? And you can program a micro controller using C. Or C-like programming. So the big issue here is this one. This is why you're in CSE. Okay? So anybody? Anybody? Alright? So let's try well unfortunately there's very little time left. So I can't really let you let your brain have the luxury of time. Because if you're given enough time you concentrate hard enough or you try to look it up or whatever which is Daya eventually maybe you'll think of something. Okay? But unfortunately there's not enough time to do that. So the first step is to make the DC signal. All right? Let's assume that this is your small DC signal and you want to make it AC. How do you do that? Well you can employ what is called conceptually as a chopper circuit. What's a chopper circuit? Okay. What the hell is a chopper circuit? So here is your DC and if you extend this here you'll see that this is lined up over here. So a chopper the DC signal through and disconnect the signal so that it drops back to zero. Okay. This is zero volts. All right? And then you gate it back on and then you disconnect it. You connect it. You disconnect it. You connect it. You disconnect it. What is this? Well this is an AC signal. Okay. So a chopper circuit basically just connects and disconnects the DC signal so that it becomes AC. Do you follow? All right? So the big question is all right? Conceptually it's very simple. Connect disconnect connect disconnect connect disconnect. So what is inside this block? Okay. What is the circuit inside this block? What is a chopper circuit? What can you use to make a chopper circuit? No! How are you going to use a diode? Okay. does a diode connect and disconnect with the DC signal? It doesn't. Yeah, it's, well, connect disconnect implies a switch. Now, what can you use that acts as a switch? I told you it's connected to JFET, right? Yep. Exactly. Okay. So, you can use a JFET as a switch to chop the signal. Okay. It won't chop it by itself. It needs a control signal. All right? It needs a control signal. All right? It needs a control signal to the gate. But there's the term already. All right? So, as long as you produce that signal, what does that signal look like? Well, it's a signal that looks exactly the same. All right? To the gate. So, that the JFET chops the input and produces the AC signal as a result. What does that circuit look like? Well, it looks exactly like this. There's your signal. All right? So, you provide a VGS on-off signal. All right? This one. So, that your TC signal, which is going in, will come out looking like this. Okay? So, again, we can see that if you extend this here, this is simply the signal getting through. And this one, when you provide it with zero volts, all right, the JFET turns on, all right, and shorts the signal to ground, and that's why the output becomes zero. Okay? And then when you give it a VGS equals pinch-off voltage, the thing becomes an open circuit, okay, so that the thing allows the signal to get through. All right? And that's where you get this one. So, here's now your VAC. Okay? There's your AC signal now. It's a changing signal. All right? It's a changing signal now. All through the magic of a JFED. Okay? And so, now we put it into an AC amplifier, maybe even your 2N22222 with that emitter bypass capacitor or whatever and the output. Okay? Can you get a gain of 165? The answer is yes. Remember, we already managed to get a gain of 125. What were the values of the resistors that we put in? I can't quite remember, but I believe that that was a 4.7K. And so, if you change this 4.7K into a higher resistance, say, for example, 5.6K, you're going to find that the gain will go even higher than 125. You will be able to get 165 voltage gain by just changing the collector resistor. Yes, the output's going to be high impedance, but what the hell? All right? It's going to be very high impedance. So, you can always buffer it. All right? So, the correct configuration is probably going to look something like this. followed by an emitter follower to provide you with the required buffering so that the impedance comes back down. Or, you could be a little bit more creative and you can say that instead of putting it into another bipolar, you can just put it into another JFET because you know that a JFET has very high input impedance so that it doesn't load down the circuit and then you take the output of the JFET which will bring the impedance back down to something a lot more manageable. So, this is pretty straightforward. Okay? You can get a times 165 and the beauty of all of this is it does not matter if the cue point changes. Okay? It does not matter if the cue point changes because a changing cue point will simply mean that the output signal will change in position. All right? So, the amplified output can appear here or it can appear here. All right? Sorry. It has to be the same period and frequency. Pwede siyang nasa taas pwede siyang nasa baba. All right? Ang importante po ay amplitude niya. Gaano kalaki yan? It doesn't matter what the DC position is. What matters is it's AC peak to peak. All right? Amplitude which is representative of our weight. Okay? Magiging mas malaki ang peak to peak niyan kung mas mabigat ang nakatimbang. Kung magaan ang nakatimbang, mas maliit ang V peak to peak niyan. And it will follow the proportion properly. All right? Because that's already amplified by a factor of 165. The peak to peak voltage that you see there is the original signal amplified by a factor of 165 if you get the gain of the AC amplifier correct. Now, the fact there is that it will be of the correct peak to peak but it can be up or down DC wise. Okay? So, how do you take that and make it into a viable signal that is again a DC signal for our Arduino to digitize? Okay? All right. And so, we go to the last part which is a peak detector. So, if we pass this AC signal through a capacitor, your AC signal will naturally fall down with a center line at zero volts. Okay? All you need to do now is get this peak value. All right? Kung saan man umabot yan, that is your D sub peak already as against zero volts. And that is proportional to your weight. All right? And so, what do you need? Well, you need a peak detector. You need something that just takes the highest point and holds it out so that your analog to digital converter on the Arduino can work on that signal. All right? so that you get a steady state DC signal that proportionately varies with the input wave. Now, so this is the last part. It's practically one minute to nine o'clock. How do you make a peak detector? How do you make it hold whatever is the peak voltage? Well, the answer is, all right, I'll go very fast here. All right? A peak detector or peak envelope detector can be made out of another JPEP. Okay? And in this case, you're using the JPEP as a device to sample the signal at its peak and hold the output at that level. So what you need is what you call as a sample and hold circuit which can be made using a JFET plus a capacitor. Okay? Sorry, we're out of time, so I'll just show you that thing. So here's your JFET and here's your capacitor. Okay? The sampling pulse is the same signal that you use to chop the original input signal a while ago. Okay? So yung signal na ginamit nyo na pang chop nung input signal is the same signal that you use to tell this JFET to sample and hold. And when you do this, alright, you're going to get the exact correct time to sample because that's the point where you chopped it or you weren't chopping it, alright? And then when you chop it, this is the time that you tell this circuit to hold. And then you go back to sampling, alright, then when you go back to holding, the capacitor will hold it right there. Okay? And so that's the idea, alright, and that's your now your DC restored signal, but it is now of the correct magnitude because it is the amplified version. Okay? So all through the magic of JFETs. Okay? So we used a JFET twice here. One for chopping and one for sample and hold. Amplifier, BJP. Okay? Alright. Questions? Questions? That's actually the last slide. Alright? So do you have questions? I have to stop share so I can see you. Okay. Okay ba tayo? Gets nyo? Yes, ma? Hindi? Hello? Yes? Okay. Sige. Alright. So FYI, okay, I need to dismiss you. That's the end of the lecture for today. I am currently checking your quiz. Nakita ko na meron, medyo maraming meron, maraming blanco, napakasakit. Meron din naman dyan maraming sagot na hindi mo nalaman kung hindi mo malaman kung saan nanggaling yung sagot. Okay? At meron naman na, uy, nakakatuwa naman, at maraming tamang sagot. Okay? That just says that it's very spread out rather unfortunately. So anyway, checking is very painfully slow. Alright, so I'll stop here. Thank you for joining us today and I'll see you again next time. Goodbye.
