I'm back. Resume recording here, and we are going to get back to where we left off from last time. And of course, the worry here is we are well ahead of the other class, which is not ideal. We have to find a way to sort of synchronize it, but that's practically impossible at this point. Let me just delay a little bit more. I'm putting up the chat and participants list here so that I can see if you have any questions later while the lecture is ongoing. And okay, right. And let's get back to our lesson. Let me just start the lecture where we left off. And before that, let me just double. Eh? Oh, no. What? Invalid? What the hell? Okay. An update is just mucked up something here. What is going on? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Let me just have a quick look here. Hang on. Hang on. Okay. Let me just do this. Let me just paste. Ah! Well, what now? Why is my Pycom gone? Darn it. What the hell? Huh? Okay. Sorry about that. This was working last week, but it isn't now obviously. So what the heck happened? Okay. Something took it out. That's odd. Hmm. Oh, no. Oh, no. Oh, no. That doesn't inspire much confidence, eh? Given the fact that there were several, there was a severe, if you're not aware, there was an incidence of hacking on the Arch Linux ecosystem, if you like. I'm not using Arch Linux, but it was in the AUR, the user repository. Over 1,500 of those non-maintained apps were compromised recently. And that hasn't even been. So I hope it doesn't, hasn't gotten into a boot loop. Anyway. Okay. That seems to have gone through. And if ever anything, I would have infected my system. I hope not. Okay. So let's see. Let me try to get back to this slideshow. Anyway, as I said, we're well ahead. Start from current slide. And let me just see if this works. Well, that does work, but I don't really like that. Where is my... Ah, this is a mess. Sorry. Let me just do a share. And capture this. Okay. All right. So hopefully you guys can all see this. And we can proceed. Okay. All right. For some reason, there's something weird that's happening, but I can't seem to... Well, that still works anyway, but yeah, it might slow down. Because this is not the mode that we are practicing last time, which was proven to be pretty light on the operating system, but we'll see how it goes. All right. So DC bias with voltage feedback is the topic for today. And you might recall that this is essentially where we stopped at our lecture when we were face-to-face last Thursday. Okay. So prior to this, if you have a fogginess in your brain, the topic was about voltage divider bias. Okay. And we closed off at a comparison between the exact analysis where you do your Thevenin equivalent for the voltage divider versus the use of approximation. All right. All right. And so again, the key factor here is to determine if an approximation is good enough. And it was proven that the resulting values, if there is a small amount of current only going into the base versus how much current is actually available and provided by the voltage divider, if the amount of current is very, very dominant, where the base current is negligible, then an approximation is quite acceptable. Okay. Okay. Okay. We got results that were, you know, within 5%, 10% of the exact analysis, which under normal circumstances, the beta figure of the transistor would probably be off by a greater degree anyway. Okay. All right. So having said that, we investigate now the voltage feedback. Okay. So conceptually, again, just to reiterate, the way this thing works essentially is that the recognition that whatever effects that you might have, for example, a shrinking voltage from base to emitter, you know, if VBE were to drop, again, if temperature rises, then VBE becomes smaller. Okay. And what is going to happen is that if VBE becomes smaller, then IB will basically increase. Okay. Okay. Because of the fact that the voltage drop here, V sub RB, okay, V sub RB would have increased when this one went down. All right. And so if the amount of base current IB basically goes up, then we can expect our collector current to also go up. Okay. Okay. Okay. And if collector current goes up, okay, the voltage across V sub RC will also go up. Okay. So the transistor is turned on harder, which pulls, all right, and makes your VCE go lower, which again results in your V sub RC increasing. So if V sub RC increases, and you also recognize that VCE became smaller, you'll notice that the emitter is connected to ground, then the voltage at this point must have gone down. V sub C must have gone down. All right. And we can write that V sub C goes down. And if V sub C goes down, then the voltage across V sub RB, all right, must, all right, V sub RB, sorry, all right, must go down. Okay. Why? Because the collector voltage came down. There's less voltage now for V sub RB. And because there's less voltage across V sub RB, all right, the result is IB must have gone down. So you'll notice that temperature increase, all right, would have normally caused I sub B to go up due to the fact that VBE shrunk a little bit. But as a net result of this RB strategically connected to the collector instead, all right, normally it would have been connected to VCC, which would have been constant. It would not have had any chance of responding, all right? But here we're connecting RB to the collector, which goes down. And if the collector voltage goes down, then IB must also go down. So you'll see that we have two canceling effects, all right? We have a net result where any tendency for IB to increase will be counteracted by the transistor circuit itself trying to pull IB back down. And of course, again, you're going to have an equilibrium point. If you calculate these things correctly, then your question point as a result of this should be where you want it. And it should stay there regardless of how much temperature change that there is. Or at least if ever it does change, it will be less affected by temperature changes. Okay? So this is a nice nifty approach. Also, the claim here is that it's only slightly dependent on transistor beta. So this is what we call, again, as a feedback-type system, all right? You can see the chain of actions arriving more or less back where you almost started, which has, in this case, the feedback is designed to provide DC cue point stability, all right? This is not the only reason or situation where feedback is used. We use feedback, all right, in our own lives on ourselves. You take a quiz, you get the result. That's your feedback to your current state of knowledge, which hopefully drives you to study harder, all right? Or something like that. Your parents have used countless methods of feedback, both positive and negative, to motivate you. Do well in your blah, blah, blah. You know, you can take a trip to blah, blah. I will finance your trip to X, Y, Z. So that's, you know, feedback, a positive feedback mechanism. All right? So we're all familiar with this to a certain extent. So this is the whole idea behind DC bias with voltage feedback. The main point or difference here, essentially, again, is that the base resistor, which is normally connected to the connector, is now instead connected to the collector, all right? So that changes will, you know, shift the thing back to where it's supposed to have been. All right? Okay. So there you go with that. Hopefully, we can now proceed to the analysis of, you know, the equations associated with it. And again, unfortunately, it is interactive, all right? So let's have a quick look. So DC bias with voltage feedback, we're looking at the input loop here, okay? So KVL over at the input loop, we have our supply voltage, VCC, all right? We have VCC here. We start here. We go around and we wind up at ICRC, all right? Which is the output as well, you'll notice, but we're at the input. So the output loop and the input loop have a shared component, which is the R sub C, all right? RC times IC. Maybe it's going to come out here anyway, all right? It will. So V minus VCC plus ICRC, all right? And then you have plus IBRB, all right, over here, okay? Plus VBE. And thankfully, oh, wait, hang on. Look at that. There's a difference between that previous circuit and this one that's being shown here. This one's even more sophisticated where it has an IERE, all right? Now, you might recognize that difference. So let me just go backwards. You'll notice that there's no emitter resistor for this particular example. All right? But in this one, there is. So it is possible to combine techniques to provide hopefully even better stability, all right? Kung baga, yung emitter stabilized feedback, kinombine pa natin sa DC bias with voltage feedback, all right? AKA voltage feedback. So this is about as complex as you might want to get it. Okay? And because that's the example here and that's what's going to be derived, the equations are going to be even more complex. You might as well give you the most complex version. Okay? Might as well give you the most complex version. So as you can see, this is exactly the same equation as what I've written here on top, except I forgot to close this off because that's done. All right? So it's the same equation except that the positive negativeness here is inverted against what I wrote. It's the same thing, essentially. Just multiply by negative 1. All right? And then if we... What? Hindi nakikita ang notations? Really? Hang on. What do you mean? All right. So you mean everything that I'm writing here is not coming out? Is that it? Can you see this red stuff that I'm writing? Ah-ha. What the hell? Okay. Okay. Hang on. Why didn't anybody say so? So let's... Hang on. Hang on. Hang on. Hang on. What? Okay. All right. Hang on. Hang on. Hang on. What's going on, man? Nala, ha? I missed the software. Ah, man. Okay. Let me try something. What I use... Okay. Okay. Hang on. Let me just try this. Okay. Hang on. Let me just try this. So current slide. some really odd things that are happening right now. Okay. Okay. Okay. The problem really here is that, you know, software just got updated, which is really nuts. Let's see. Let's see. Yeah. I don't know if this is going to be any better. Let me just try it. And you need to give me feedback. Let me just capture this. Share this slide. Okay. Share this slide. Okay. Okay. Share this slide. Okay. Okay. All right. Okay. Okay. So you can see the circuit, I suppose. Okay. And can you see this thing that I am drawing here right now? ! I am just put a lot of stuff over RV. There is another option. There is another option. There is another option. Okay. So why does this work and why doesn't the other one work? Okay. I really don't get it. I don't get it. Okay. And then there's this other option, which is this one, which wasn't showing up a while ago. So I can try this one as well. And this one should also be visible. This red color here. Is it? Yes? Yeah. Okay. Sige. So this is what I was actually expecting a while ago. But for some odd reason, it was not actually working with the other setting or software. All right. Sige. Well, frankly, we didn't miss much because what came out of the presentation is essentially the same equation anyway. So you notice that this software here is a slightly different font. That's why it looks on. Anyway, let's see what happens. Because the other thing that can happen is that this software might be compatible with the one with the presentation itself. But fingers crossed. Okay. So that's your KVL input loop. All right. And that's kind of sad. But yes, it just follows the basic path. And they've just changed the polarity here. Normally, we'd write it as minus VCC plus ICRC plus IVRB, et cetera, et cetera. So just it's like you just put it on the other side of the equation. So that doesn't really matter. So as far as this is concerned, this is fine. Okay. And so this is okay. What is this one? Though this is wrong. What the hell does that mean? All right. IB is definitely less than I sub C. All right. I prime C is equal to IC plus IB, which is roughly equal to IC. Okay. Yes, this is correct. Okay. So I prime C here is the collector current along with I sub B. All right. And so this is more technically really, what's this? Recognizing the fact that the current that is flowing through our collector resistor, in fact, is a sum of the collector current itself plus the current going through our R sub B, which would be our IB. So that is why we have this particular equation here. I prime C is equal to IC plus IB, which is what is over here. However, you can do an approximation assuming that the gain is high. All right. I think the symbol here is actually quite wrong, which is why it's confusing. This should be, you might want to take note of this. We're being recorded. So when I put these slides up as a PDF, please note that this is wrong. Okay. Refer to the video for the correction. This should be IB is much, much less than IC. This is what this symbol here is supposed to be. Not the less than or equal to. Okay. So mali yan. Okay. It's supposed to be this one. Okay. And that's the only way that that would make sense. Whoever created this set of slides here, apparently, well, it's been wrong for a long time. And it wasn't me. We're just borrowing the slides from somewhere. All right. So having said that, since IB is, again, considered to be such a... a fractional portion of I sub C, we can probably say that I prime C is practically the same thing as IC itself. Just a little bit more than that. So we can ignore that. And because of that, all right, you'll notice that this is practically saying that I prime C is equal to IE because IE is equal to... What is IC plus IB in the first place? This is a fundamental equation of the transistor. So in that case, because we're saying that I prime C is roughly equal to I sub C, we're also going to say that IC is roughly equal to IE anyway. All right. And we can just treat these values as being one and the same, which basically says we're ignoring the base current for now. All right. Just to simplify the equation. Okay. The loop equation then basically simplifies to something like this. All right. We can now rewrite the IC as beta times IB. And we can also rewrite IE as beta IB. If you want to be more exact, you can write it as beta plus 1 IB. All right. If you want it to be more exact. But this, again, is just a small approximation difference. So we can write it that way. All right. Let me just formally write it down here. And again, it's in the video. All right. Beta plus 1 is the more exact value. All right. Okay. And because of that, you are now consistent. You have a set of equations that are just all IB, IB, IB, all beta, beta, beta. And so therefore, you can come up with this equation for I sub B, where it is equal to VCC minus VBE over RB plus beta times RC plus RE. Okay. So I think the bottom line here is unfortunately, the equation that has been derived here. Okay. It's not particularly intuitive because you're subtracting VBE from VCC. All right. And if you look at it, VBE is this guy. All right. But it doesn't really look like a KVL if you look at this particular last equation. But we've traced this out from here to here to here. So essentially, this is what IB is calculatable to be. And so under such circumstances, I would highly recommend that you simply commit the equation to memory because looking at it without going through the derivation. It's not really intuitive that you'll be able to derive or write the IB equation just by inspection. It really goes through some manipulation for that to basically come out. Okay. So it's much easier in this case to memorize it and say that, okay, for this particular configuration, the equation turns out to be like so. All right. And the bottom part, the quotient here of this, R sub B, all right, plus beta times RC plus RE. Okay. So this is the interesting bit here. There's that additional thing that makes the current really, really tiny, which is the beta multiplication of RC plus RE. All right. And so that's your input loop. This looks really messy now. So let me just erase everything here. Okay. And again, highlight that this is the equation of interest. Okay. So there we go with that. All right. Now, as for the output loop naman, okay, dito naman tayo sa output loop. And again, you'll notice that, well, if we start from this side, it is IERE, VCE, ICRC minus VCC. All right. So the input included this part. And this part, the output includes the same components, unfortunately. So they are interactive with each other. No question about it. All right. Okay. And going forward, again, if we make this approximation, I prime C, which is IE, is roughly equal to IC. And IC is equal to beta IB. We can do the substitution. All right. Okay. We can do the substitution from there and come up with this particular equation. And we can see that the voltage from collector to emitter is simply a function of the supply voltage. All right. Multiply minus I sub C multiplied to RC plus RE. And that is doable by inspection. You see, that's the difference. You can actually get that because you can see that this and this subtracted to VCC will leave you with VCE. There's really nothing much there. And you already inherently and easily remember that IC and IE are roughly the same value anyway. So you can just substitute that and then multiply or add the two resistor values together. And doing so gives you the total voltage. This plus this. All right. Combined here. Subtract that from VCC and you are left with the collector to emitter voltage. Okay. So the output loop is easy enough. It's the input loop that's kind of counter into WITIM where you're trying to solve for IB. Okay. All right. And so having said that, okay, having gone through those equations, I don't know if you've memorized it. All right. I don't expect that you've memorized it. But if you had a little piece of paper there, hopefully you might have written it down. All right. Let me hold the screen for the moment here so that you have that opportunity to write down the equation. Okay. So that's your output equation over there. I am taking my pencil. All right. I'm taking my pencil. All right. And I'm writing this down as well in front of me. VCE is equal to VCC minus I sub C times RC plus RE. Okay. And prior to this one, it is basically your input loop, which is IB is equal to VCC minus VBE divided by RB plus beta. All right. Beta times RC plus RE. All right. Not really that hard to memorize actually. But hey, if you're not confident, by all means, write it down. All right. So let's get to the solving problem here. Oh, wow. This looks so complex. Who can try solving this? Mahirap pa ito o madali? Answer, madali lang yan. Okay. Sige. So let's give it a go. All right. Determine IB and VC is the, you know, are the points. All right. To get points for this quiz. All right. So determine IB and VC. All right. So IB is just the input equation. All right. So all you got to do is do your substitutions there. You should be able to get the answer for that. VC is quite easy because you have your output equation. You'll be able to calculate VCE. And you'll also be able to calculate your V sub E rather easily by recognizing that whatever is your calculated collector current or emitter current, if you wanted to, you know, whatever, which would be numerically the same thing because you're doing approximations, multiplied to 510 ohms will give you your V sub E. So just adding those two will give you your answer. Pretty straightforward. So the only challenge here might be the fact that you might be overwhelmed or confused or miffed or at least taken aback a little bit by why does it appear to be so complex? All right. What the hell is going on over there? Okay. So if you have a very, very quick look here, all right, thing is that you're not supposed to or what you should remember is that capacitors, when you're doing DC analysis, all right, when you're doing DC analysis, what's the rule? Well, the rule essentially is that if you're doing DC analysis, then the capacitors are basically open circuits. Remember, okay, so for DC, all right, capacitors are open circuit. All right. So let's not forget that. Keep that in mind. And because they are open circuit, we just mentally erase them. All right. We just mentally erase them so that it becomes less confusing, hopefully. And so now you're left essentially with a pretty much straightforward circuit. Okay. So if you were to ask me, sir, why are the capacitors and what is that weird configuration with that capacitor in the middle of the two resistors? Well, we'll get to know these and their function. It is going to be doing a job, but this is related to the AC amplification of this particular circuit, which we are not covering yet. Okay. That's for next week after the quiz. All right. So this is for AC purposes. All right. Which will allow the transistor to amplify an AC signal. All right. While not perturbing or changing the DC operating point. All right. That's the beauty of the capacitors function there. All right. So having this, we can say that simply that RB is just the sum of these two resistors here, which will give us 201 kilo ohms. Okay. 91 plus 110. All right. 91 kilo ohms plus 110 kilo ohms is 201 kilo ohms. All right. RC is equal to 3.3 K and RE is equal to 510 ohms. You are given a beta of 75. All right. And so that's it. Very, very straightforward. It's just a plug and play kind of problem because all you do is substitute these values into the equations that were provided and you should be able to get your answer. All right. So just to reiterate, if you have not yet written it down, well, the slide this time is happy enough to put it up there. VCC minus VBE over RB plus beta times RC plus RE. This is just a question of substitution. All right. And the output equation. All right. You can, in fact, just do it in one shot. All right. So instead of using VCE as the actual thing that you're trying to solve, you can simply shift over to just taking VCC and subtracting ICRC. All right. Because that gives you your collector voltage immediately. So I don't know if you recognize that. VCC is all the way up here. That's your supply voltage. All right. Which is 80 volts. If you subtract the voltage here, you're basically left with the collector voltage V sub C, which is answering the question more directly. All right. So again, that's very, very easy because of the fact that if you start by calculating IB, you'll be able to basically calculate your I sub C because you have your beta given in the problem. All right. So this makes the answering of this thing particularly straightforward. So don't hesitate to manipulate. And when you recognize that I can get it more directly by this, by all means, go ahead and do that. Okay. So the end result, nobody calculated it. All right. But what the hell? This is, again, just the question of substitute shot. 18 minus 0.7 divided by 201K plus 75 times 3.3K plus 510 ohms. Okay. Okay. All right. So that's your IB. All right. IB is equal to that. Somebody has a calculator. You'd be happy to calculate it. And is happy enough to calculate it. You can do that. Well, I do happen to have a calculator now that I'm here. 17.3 volts divided by, okay, this one's quite a bit bigger. So I'll do the 3.3K. 3,300 plus 510, all right, times 75 is a, oh, it's a very big value. All right. This is equal to 201 kilo ohms plus 285.75 K ohms, all right, which is going to calculate to a very, very small IB, all right, indeed. And I ran out of space. So let's put that down here. I sub B, okay, hang on, okay, is equal to 17.3 volts divided by 486, all right, 486.75K, which is, oh, well, it's not really that tiny. 35.54 micro amperes, all right. Hopefully I mistyped anything, all right. Let's try that again. 17.3 divided by 486.75 times 10 to the third is indeed 300, sorry, 35.54 micro amperes. So that's the first answer, all right. That's the first answer. You now have I sub B, all right. And of course, following this equation here, V sub C is equal to 18 volts minus, all right, I sub C, which we'll have to calculate first, I C is equal to 75 times 35.54 micro amperes. This is a small amount of current, okay. Okay. 2.66, 2.665639. Okay. What, how do you run that? Oh, 2.666. Oh my God. All right. 2.67. All right. 2.67 milli amperes. Okay. So approximately, but, you know, I'm not rounding it off. I mean, we have the calculated answer here. All right. And so we can multiply this to our R sub C, all right. And that will give us 8.79, right? 8.79, 8.8 volts practically. All right. 18 minus, what's this? Sorry. 8.79, 8.79, 6, 6 volts, which is equal to, right? 9.2. Okay. So there's your answer for these two questions. All right. I, B, and V sub C. These are the answers. 9.20. All right. Okay. So are there any questions about this, people? May tanong ba? Madali, di ba? Madali. Questions? Questions? Ay, naku, buhay na buhay yung klase ngayon, ha? Mayabang, mayabang. Ayaw magtanong kasi. O, yan. Tapos, pagdating ng quiz. Okay. Pakitaan niyo ako, ha? Pagdating ng quiz. Dapat, perfect ang sagot. Walang nagtatanong, eh. O. Questions? No questions? All right. If there are no questions, thumbs up, please. Buhay ba ba kayo dyan? Hello? Hello? Yes? Okay. All right. Sige. So, looks easy. Why does it look easy? Because it's easy. All right. So, let's go forward. All right. Sample problem. Another one here. Another one bites the dust. Ay, halos pareho lang to, eh. Okay. Pretty much similar problem. Again, just a question of substitution. Okay. Question of substitution. Get slightly different answer. All right. 4K, 460K, and 1 kilo ohm. Beta equals 100. Slightly higher operating voltage. Supply voltage of 20 volts. Okay. So, what's that going to turn out to be? All right. Another sample problem here. Puro mga sample problems na lang yata ito. Matali yun lang. Matali yun lang ba? Matali. Okay. All right. Eh, eh, eh. All right. So, again, all you need is formula. Okay. Our I sub V is equal to VCC minus VBE. Ay, I'm cool. All right. Over RB plus beta times RC plus RE. I mean, how can you possibly make a mistake with some simple problem such as this, eh? All right. And VCE is equal to VCC minus. All right. Again, as an approximation. Well, whatever. You can just use IC times RC plus RR. Okay. Well, there you go. And, of course, the missing equation there would be to relate IB and IC. Okay. IC is equal to beta IB. There. All right. And once you have these three, plug and produce answer. All right. Taliran lang yan. I think the problem really here is that the slides don't actually provide the correct answer. But, yeah, well, what the hell. Okay. It's more than enough time, actually. So, nobody will complain. Ah, sir does not provide answer. Oh, ito. May mga sagot. Sige. So, again, we start with IB. Okay. 20 volts minus 0.7. Dibye, dibye. 460K. 460K. Wow. Very high value. Plus 100 multiplied to 4K plus 1K. All right. And, obviously, now we can. Don't hang on me. All right. 19.3 volts divided by 5 kilo ohms here times 100. So, 460K plus 500K. All right. All right. Which gives us 960K. 19.3 volts over 960K ohms. Which is really tiny in value. All right. 19.3. Oh, well, again, as a sanity check, make sure that you don't get some really odd looking VCE value. Mamiya, pag-calculate mo, eh, imposible yung value. Kailangan ma-recognize ninyo. Negative ang lumabas. Okay. So, obviously, can't be possible. Or, well, something like that. Okay. So, 19.3 divided by 960 times 10 to the third. Okay. Which is going to give you a rather small 20.1. All right. Micro amperes. As your IB. All right. I hope somebody is cross-checking. There's nothing better to do. Run your calculator. Sayang naman yung pagbili nyo ng calculator. Okay. So, there's your I sub V. Therefore, your I sub C. All right. Is this multiplied by a factor of 100. This gives you a 2.01 milliampere for I sub C. Which will aid your calculation for VCE. All right. Because VCE basically is equal to. All right. VCC minus IC times RE plus. Sorry. RC. All right. So, this is again the same banana here. And we can see that VCE is equal to 20 volts. Subtracted by 2.01 milliampere multiplied to 5k ohms. All right. And just a little bit of mental math. You can see that this is 2 times 5. All right. 2 times 10 to the minus 3. Times 5. Times 10 to the third. Cancel. Cancel. That gives you approximately 10 volts. All right. And so, 20 minus 10 volts gives you approximately 10 volts. Okay. So, actually, in fact, 9.9 volts. Unless my math is wrong. Okay. There we go. Okay. I'm using slightly more, you know, exacting values here. Because I'm not rounding off. I'm letting the calculator just go right along with it. Okay. And this gives a 9.947. All right. 9.947. 948. 9.948 volts. 9.95 volts. What the hell? All right. Close enough. All right. So, VCE is equal to 9.95. All right. And that's your IB answer here. And that answers the questions. All right. All three of them. Okay. So, I hope that there are no issues here. Are there questions, people? Talangan. Patali. Easy. Easy. Okay. So, I think we can go forward. All right. Can we go forward? Can we go forward? No problem. Okay. All right. So, let's go forward. Oh, look at this. Hang on. Erase everything. Eraser. Hang on. Erase. Hear everything. All right. Determine the power dissipated by P sub C in milliwatts. Use approximate analysis if acceptable. Ayan. Ayan. Mas may challenge. This is back to the Thursday lesson. All right. Now, do you remember how to do this? Mad scramble. Use approximate analysis if acceptable. Oop. Mula yung pen. All right. And that's the question. Now, do you guys remember how to determine if approximate analysis is acceptable? Excuse me. Excuse me. Data. O. Oy. Sumagot naman kayo dito. Lagay dito sa chat. Paano? All right. How do I determine if approximate analysis is acceptable? All right. How do I do that? What do I need? What info do I need? How do I calculate it? Hello. Nobody wants to answer? Okay. Ahem. Ahem. Ahem. Everybody is not in the mood to bother with the lesson. Okay. Ayan. Ayan na. Thank you very much. All right. So, somebody here says beta RE is greater than 10 times R2. All right. Greater than or equal to. Yeah. All right. So, there we go. Very good. Thank you very much. All right. So, beta times RE. All right. Is it greater than? Ideally. All right. Ideally, it would be greater than. Greater, greater than would be even best. All right. 10 times R2. All right. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. And by inspection, well, is it a close call? or is it a very obvious yes, it's okay or whatever. So your beta is 80. You'll be multiplying that to 1.2 kilo ohms. Whereas this one is a 7 kilo ohm, which if you multiply by 10 is just 70 kilo ohms. All right? So dito palang obvious. Actually, as I was sitting here, it was already looking pretty obvious. But anyway, all right? So if this were exactly 1 ko, multiplying it by 80 will give you 80k. All right? So dito palang, oo na. Diba? It's already a yes. But, all right, given the fact that it is 1.2 k, which is even greater than 1 kilo ohm, then the answer is yes. All right? It's pretty obviously yes. So given this, we can say that approximate analysis is acceptable. All right? So approximate analysis is acceptable. So let's use approximate analysis. Now, do you remember what to do to try to get the answer for this? All right? So when you do approximate analysis, it's very easy because everything, you just shove in and say, everything is an approximation. Anyway, what dahil? Right? Okay. Ano nga ba yung goal dito? Determine the power dissipated. All right? Determine the power dissipated by P sub C. By the transistor pala. Sorry. What the hell? The power dissipated by the transistor. And that variable is here given as P sub C. All right? P sub C. And express this in milliwatts. Okay? So how do we do that? Well, we can say that the power dissipation of the transistor P sub C, in this case, because it insisted on using P sub C, again, is simply equal to, or roughly equal to, IC times VCE. All right? If you wanted a more exacting value, you could use IE times VCE. All right? That would be the more exacting value. But again, most of the time, most people will just calculate it on the basis of the collector current. All right? Okay. Okay. So looking at that, how do we get that? Well, obviously, we're going to have to solve for, you know, these two operating values to get the power dissipation. Okay? And so this is just a question of, well, basically solving for the question point. And how do you do that? Using approximate analysis. Well, find out what your voltage here is. All right? This is your voltage at the base. Okay? All right? And you can subtract your VBE to get your voltage at the emitter. And if you get the voltage at the emitter, then you can get your I sub E, which is simply equal to VE divided by 1RE, which you can just get because it's given. All right? So there you go. That's stupidly easy. All right? And given that, all right, we didn't even bother to use the beta is equal to 80 here. All right? We didn't bother to use it. You actually already can follow with the rest because you can already say that IC is roughly equal to IE. And so therefore, you're going to be able to get your V sub RC. And if you have your V sub RC, you have your 12 volts, and you have your V sub E. All right? Then you have your VCE. And because you have your VCE, you will be able to get the participation. All right? So, easy, easy stuff. All right? Easy, easy. If approximate analysis is acceptable because every other approximation becomes acceptable. All right? Okay. So, there you go with that. That's really not particularly challenging if you get down to the brass and tax all of it. Okay? All right. Do we need to actually solve this? Because that's pretty much there. Okay? What the hell? If you have a calculator, you can easily do that. And, yeah, you'd expect a small amount of participation. Just for the heck of it, VB. All right? VB is just based on the voltage divider, it is equal to 12 times 7K over 7K plus 27K. And I will not take this step by step anymore because it takes too long and I'm getting bored. All right? So, that's basically 7 divided by 7 plus 27. All right? Multiplied by 12 and that gives us 2.47 volts. Okay? So, VB is equal to 2.47 volts. VE is equal to 2.47 minus 0.7 which is 1.77 volts. All right? Ah! For the heck of it because we're on video. All right? VE is equal to VB minus VBE. Okay? All right. So, VE is equal to 1.77 volts. Therefore, IE is equal to all right? 1.77 volts divided by 1,200 is equal to 1.475. All right? 1.475 AAA. 1.476 is the better approximation, I guess, milliampere. Okay? 1.476 milliampere. There we go with that. Congratulations. All right? We have IE and we can say that IC is roughly equal to IE. Therefore, V sub RC is equal to 1.476 milliampere multiplied to 3.8 kilo ohms which gives us a voltage of all right? Right? Times 3800 is equal to 5.61. Okay. So, there we go. Therefore, we can say that VCE is equal to 12 volts and we'll find out too if the transistor is biased property. It should be all right? 12 volts minus all right? 5.61 volts minus V sub E which is 1.77 volts and that leaves us with drumroll please 12 minus answer minus 1.77 is 4.62 volts. So, yes, it is on and it's in its active region perhaps not particularly well-centered but what the hell it will work. It is there. It is biased, right? So, that's your answer for your VCE. We have our IE and therefore we can substitute that into this particular equation and say that the power dissipation is simply equal to 1.476 milliamp peres times 4.623 volts and that gives us 6.82 milliwatt all right milliwatt okay there we go the answer all right the answer is there 6.82 milliwatt give or take questions all right all right well DC biasing is not really that if you have the formulas memorized you know you recognize the configuration and you have the formulas there and you're not too bad in recognizing that hey I can substitute this here and there and you'll be fine okay you'll be fine most of the time it will be a problem with you know more a problem with with these single transistor configurations it's not really difficult at all all right okay so there we go questions questions questions questions no questions I am forward no no slide I am forward slide okay last time and then you wait a few moments then it will be ready to go forward maybe right maybe I have to click something so show fans please thumbs up if there are no questions about this so far are we okay yeah all right now it's ready to go determine I sub B in microampere I sub C in microampere and V C in volts okay sandali let's erase everything here clear all right okay oh another one of these ah heh oh mahirap na ito oh sige try nyo might be a little bit this is just one of those it's just a variation or variant in terms of the supply voltage maybe it looks a little bit strange but you know this is perfectly valid this will work transistor is quite happy it doesn't really care about you know absolute voltages as long as the voltages are are correctly applied and it's within its operating parameters all right then it doesn't really care it should work properly so the only problem that you're going to have here is your own brain not accepting and not understanding how to rewrite or re-reference your calculations to be able to get the correct answer it's basically the formulas are not going to change all right formulas are not going to change it's exactly the same set of formulas it's just the question of how do you reference the voltages all right all right so looking at this all right the main difference here is that the instead of ground we are now at negative 12 as our emitter connection our emitter resistor is connected to negative 12 okay and not a big deal right not a big deal so two ways of tackling this problem essentially if you look at it and let your mind accept it all right and just simply say that well I used to have circuits where the reference for all measurements is ground aka zero volts ground right now in this case if I wanted to use exactly the same thing then I can say that my reference is negative 12 volts all right your reference is negative 12 volts right if you're having a hard time visualizing that just think of yourself staring at a you know a building with an underground basement this is your ground level all right this is where cars and buses and people are normally work you know walking bakit hindi naman mukhang kotse yan okay and dito yung bus or whatever all right and dito yung stoplight stoplight ni Juan okay so ito yung building okay meron siyang basement oh ayan okay so yan yung normal ground ito yung normal na iniisip mong zero all right so meron tayong floors pataas okay up to the 12th floor all right I want to go to the 12th floor why would you want to do that nandun kasi yung sa Andrew ba ano nasa 12th floor okay I think that's where the you know prayer area is or whatever I don't remember never go to the 12th floor all right and let's pretend that Andrew has basement all the way to the negative 12th floor all right undergrad parking hanggang negative 12 b1 b2 b3 hanggang d12 basement 12 parking wow dami naman all right so yun lang ngayon you got used to measuring from ground up to any voltage any floor upwards all right now you're standing here and measuring all voltages with reference to this one okay oh now is that hard nah not really same banana okay all right same banana just bigger more flows oh determine IB IC and BCE there you go go try it okay nasaan siya nasaan ano ang values natin okay all right so first things first all right if you're having some difficulty again this is just your emitter stabilized circuit all right nothing really special about it so follow the emitter stabilized circuit equations for that matter okay all right and the only big difference is the recognition again that your reference starts from here therefore if you want to be rather obvious you need that helping statement all right if you were asked all right you can say that this is the equivalent of well where I am referencing it I want to use that as my zero you want to put your quotation marks there so if this is considered for you to be zero okay what is this voltage relative to zero well I gotta go up from my negative 12 basement all the way to the ground floor so that's plus 12 to go up to the ground plus another 12 to go up to the actual 12 floor of the building so from here all the way up to here is actually 24 volts okay all right and so now for those equations that you got used to seeing pag sinabi niyang VCC for example dati sa substitute mo lang deretso 12 kasi ground ang basis mo zero now that you're standing at the basement negative 12 floor your 12 volts here is actually 24 volts away from the reference and so you substitute 24 instead of just 12 okay all right and you take it from there to make your calculations because if not then you know you're not going to be calculating the correct IB and so on and so forth blah blah yada yada good luck all right so we'll leave that up to you as a major mental exercise because you know hey and you have to use your brain at one point in time all right so sample problem okay ayan medyo mas challenging ng kote binigay ko na lahat ng clues na kailangan and explanations okay so there you go with that okay all right so much there are so many other examples here but again we're going to be reaching a point where it's ridiculously ahead already of the other class so well medyo bitin pero yun nga we leave that open for discussion on thursday and there's also this last part of the lesson which is transistors being used as a switch that's actually already outside of the providence of well we can include too much coverage but you know transistors as a switch as a switch is actually fairly easy so what the hell it can be a filler rather than just us sitting around on thursday doing nothing okay so we'll just finish off everything here there's just a few more slides that we need to cover for thursday and that will be it hindi pala a few quite a number pero what the hell okay sige there we go and so I think I can stop here okay meron magtanong syempre wala di ba pero magtatanong pa rin tayo any questions questions questions ame el pep ba next week wait hmm that's a good question what the hell is hmm we'll see we'll see ah aha okay well thanks for letting me contemplate about that the question that was posted here is that apparently there is el pep talk of interfering with the schedules well the point here actually really is that the quiz that is desynchronized you know on a different day compared to the other class is really not ideal so I will try to figure out something the more ideal case would be to have it at a common time eh sino pa kasi naglagay na ginawang magkaibang araw yung si Tronto na section medyo eng-eng din alright I guess at that time it never occurred to the academic programmer and I didn't complain about it either it's even worse if you you know I was just thinking about lab class time but on the other hand that might make it even worse because that's now three sections that we'll have to deal with instead of just two okay eh sige I'll think of something wait okay quick question if that's the case a quick survey of if it were although I suppose that you have your classes but if it were Friday morning 7 30 AM what how many of you actually have classes at 7 30 AM on a Friday okay all right so what out of curiosity what subject is that mukhang common sa lahat ah hindi not counting you ha LBY TRN ah so walang problema all right lahat yan lab lang naman lab okay so that's the one that's ah LBY Arch most G ethics ano ba naman yan yung mga pinagkukuha ninyong mga subject LBY TRN is not a problem because that would mean that you're under Sir John Nats and it's a unified approach that they're doing so it's pretty easy to shift that around but yeah given that some of you have other subjects at that time if we can't synchronize on anything we might be forced to put it on you know something like a like a Saturday morning which would not be ideal or of course there's always the option of Wednesday morning or something like that okay so quick survey then what about Wednesday mornings although I have meetings typically on Wednesdays Wednesday Wednesday dapat free kayo PE alright Wednesday ano aras yung PE mo Miss Shirley Shirley 8 to 10 right in the middle of the that is terrible okay which is you know actually come to think of it because the schedules are wildly different in the first days we might have to do that really in the interest of keeping the test time and day the same for all sections I guess we really have to put it onto a Saturday and well nobody should have a valid excuse of not being able to come in on a Saturday alright baka ganyan ang mangyari alright 90% probability okie dokes alright sige violent reactions alright Marion kanina pa naka up yung hand mo alright so no conflict no valid excuses for a Saturday schedule because it doesn't look like we have any other option rather than that ok sige I guess that sort of half settles it I'll confirm with the Tuesday class alright but keep it in mind for now 27 27 ayaw mo ayaw nyo ba sa 20 na pwede na sa 20 not yet alright 27 alright alright in the meantime of course because that's a long way off we will still continue with the lessons alright we will forge ahead with AC analysis of bipolar junction transistor okay so don't expect that the lessons will stop we will forge ahead we'll have you know we'll have a few exercises again further on plus switching and then move to AC analysis where we look at the actual amplification okay alright thank you
