Don't hesitate to let me know so that your questions can be properly addressed. Okay. Okay. So let me just capture the slides, the recordings on, share. Let's see this one. Okay. We are essentially picking up where we left off from last meeting, more or less. Okay. And I just like to re-emphasize this point here. As we stated last meeting, essentially there are two kinds of underlying base material that's used to create diodes in large numbers today. These two are not the only possible materials or elements that are used, but they are the ones that are commercially, let's just say, much more viable given that they are very, very low cost. No. No. So the other thing with diodes, they are basically very, very simple relative to any other kind of semiconductor. They're just two differently doped materials that have been put together. So semiconductor fabrication-wise, this is just about as simple as it can get. Okay. Okay. So the tendency again here is that diodes are fairly inexpensive and are typically at the lowest cost in the range of semiconductor devices available. Okay. Okay. Now, so going forward, let's, again, the germanium diode or GE for short, basically has a smaller forward voltage. So they are used for very low-level signal rectification purposes, which we'll go into in the next meeting. All right. Or maybe even this meeting a little bit later. So we'll talk about rectification, which was already actually covered last term as well. But here, the forward bias requirements, the forward conduction voltage requirements, where germanium begins conducting as early as 0.1 volt and typically maxes out at about 0.3 or 0.4 volts, basically means that there are much less losses in the signal for a signal that is being rectified. In contrast with silicon, which starts conducting at 0.5, but will sort of max out at 0.7 or even 0.8 volts or so for higher currents, which means that there's a larger voltage drop, which means that you're chomping off potentially a larger portion of the signal that you want to retain. So if it comes down to a small signal level where the amount of current passing through the requirement is pretty small, the preferred element is germanium. And so even up to today, we have diodes readily available that are basically germanium-based, although the selection is very, very small. It's more just a question of this diode is made out of germanium and it's good enough for the vast majority of small signal requirements for applications where silicon is not as viable. And so there's only one or two very, very popular germanium-based, and any good electronics store would have it. So if you went, for example, to the store next door to the Cox building, which is eGizmo, you will definitely be able to purchase a germanium diode. Okay. Although at such low prices, this is like you're buying resistors. When it comes to these things, they're so low cost that even if germanium is, what's this? Pretty low cost. The price difference between a germanium and a silicon diode is pretty small. They're all more or less about the same. Germanium might be even a little bit more expensive on the basis that very few people would be interested in buying them. Okay. So let's go forward with this. We passed through these slides last meeting as well. And there's just one little aspect that I'd like to emphasize here. Why is the font looking so weird? This is an equation for the saturation current. Which is sort of something that we don't really need to get into. All right. We just have to get over to this one. And I don't really know why the font is doing this. But what you're going to see here is that there is a quoted value out of all of this equation, this expansion of this equation, and the explanation of what each and every parameter is supposed to mean. But bottom line is at 20 degrees centigrade, all right, there is a resulting V sub T, all right, which is about 25 or 26, closer to 26 millivolts at 25 degrees centigrade. Okay. So we want to take note of this because we'll see this value come out again and again. And so you might be wondering, what the hell is this 26 millivolts? Okay. So this is essentially just a voltage value of V sub T, if you like, all right, which is associated with the saturation currents that are inherent in the semiconductor as it stands. All right. So this will also come out with transistors. So that's just there. Just keep that in mind. It's a figure that you just want to have in mind so that you're not wondering what the hell it is. Okay. The other thing that comes out of this equation is that you can calculate what is called as the I sub S or saturation current. And dependent on the, what's this, doping that's associated with the diode, you'll find that the calculations at room temperature, all right, come out to some values around here. 10 to the minus 15 or 10 to the minus 9, dependent on the values that you use to solve the equation. All right. So this N1 and N2, all right, which is associated with the doping levels in the diode. Again, not that important, but the bottom line here is this basically dictates, all right, this. Current that you get when the diode is reverse biased. So we mentioned last time that there is still a little bit of current flowing, even if the diode is reverse biased. And we know that the values are very small. So the reverse current, particularly at the very, very beginning over here, is basically equivalent to the saturation current, although it is dependent on temperature. So that's where that thing comes from. Okay? All right. So those are the things that we need to know. And one last thing, the breakdown region, all right, that breakdown region, that particular voltage where the breakdown happens, as mentioned also last time, is called the Zener voltage. And it is sometimes abbreviated. That voltage at which that happens is sometimes abbreviated as V sub Z K. Not only just V sub Z, but sometimes there is a letter K that's put there. And that K stands for knee, all right? So Zener knee voltage. That's how you read this abbreviation here. The Zener knee voltage is the voltage at which the diode junction breaks down due to the very, very high voltages across it. And as a result of that, the thing begins conducting again. Okay? Okay. And as also mentioned last meeting, which we'll get into as we go forward, there are special diodes that are manufactured where the knee voltage, the breakdown voltage, is controlled so that it happens at a rather much, much lower voltage potential. And these Zener's are basically designed to be used because of those voltage, lower voltage values, okay? And we'll get into the reason why you would want to use something like this, all right, in the appropriate time, right, after we've gone through the rest of it. Okay. Okay. So going forward from the last meeting, this is where we do a bit of understanding, mathematical modeling of the diode forward characteristic, okay? So this is where we start with a little bit of solving and understanding. So we start with a simple model of the diode in its forward conducting region, okay? Hindi na muna natin papansinin yung reverse bias. So for now, the reverse bias is just, you know, that it's non-conducting and practically zero current flows when it is not conducting. So we just put that there in the back of our mind. But we are now more interested in the forward conduction region. And as we stated, the forward conduction region is a rather complex-looking curve. So to simplify the mathematical modeling of this forward conduction exponential function, okay, we present and we look at three different models, all right, of increasing fidelity, meaning that they are closer and closer to the exponential but not quite, all right? But as a consequence of this increasing fidelity, each different model gets more complex. So the most simple, all right, of these three models is to model this simply as a single resistance value, R sub D, all right? And you would choose the R sub D, all right, based on where you anticipate the diode will be working at in the application, all right? In the application, how much current is this diode going to be operating at? And what is the resulting voltage across it? And by knowing these two parameters, you can calculate, obviously, an equivalent single resistor value, for which that resistance might be good enough as an approximation. Because remember that a resistance kind of function is just a straight line. So we try to choose a resistance value, which basically attempts to match this angle, if you like, of the exponential curve. And because it's exponential, of course, your resistor only approximates that exponential function. So within a small range, all right, within a small range, your simple resistor model might be good enough as an approximation. Again, parang paulit-ulit to, no? Good enough approximate, all right? Such that, you know, the resulting calculations are near enough that you can ignore, you know, the kind of error that you're going to get. Okay? All right. So as an example of this, determine the DC resistance levels for the diode in the figures shown at the right. If your I sub D is 2 milliampere, your I sub D is 20 milliampere, and if V sub D is negative 10 volts. Okay? So these are three different conditions. All right? And you're basically being asked to just look at these different points. And it's obviously very easy to answer as long as you have this graph to tell you, all right? And so by doing this, by just looking at a single point of operation of the diode, then the curve can be extrapolated. You just take the intersection to get the answer. And if you do it this way, all right, this is basically the equivalent of saying that, oh, this, whatever this operating point happens to be, can be approximated by an equivalent single resistor value. All right? But again, you're taking advantage of the fact that you do have this conduction curve as basis. All right? So to answer this question, if I sub D is 20 milliampere, you just draw this horizontal line until it intersects the actual curve, and then you drop it down vertically so that you get this 90-degree angle. And whatever the voltage intersection is, which in this case is 0.8 volts, you would say that V sub D, all right, is equal to whatever that thing intersects with. And so here's your answer for letter A. I sub D, 2 milliampere. Sorry. No. Sorry. That's for the letter B, all right? At I sub D of 20 milliampere, our forward conduction voltage is expected to be 0.8 volts, assuming that this figure is accurate for the diode that you're trying to model. Okay? At 2 milliampere, as you can see from the graph, again, 2 milliampere is this point here. You'll notice that this graph is nonlinear, all right? Or is it linear? Oh, well, yeah, it looks linear. 2 milliampere is dropped down, and you'll see that this V sub D in this case is equal to 0.5 volts. Okay? All right? And from this relation, all right, you can actually calculate an R equivalent, all right? So the R equivalent in this case is 0.5 volts divided by 2 milliampere. And for the I sub D, it is 0.8 volts divided by 20 milliampere. And you'll see that this is not proportional at all, all right? The R equivalents in this case are vastly different in value from each other. Okay? So in case number one, 0.5 volts, all right? 0.5 divided by 2 times 10 to the minus 3 gives you 250 ohms, all right? And in the second case, 0.8 volts divided by 20 times 10 to the minus 3, and you will get a value of 40 ohms, all right? So what is this telling you, essentially? That these two operating points, all right, have a very, very different equivalent resistance, which basically means that the diode's transfer function in its forward conduction region is very nonlinear. It's not a constant resistance at all, as you can see from these two radically different values. Okay? All right. So that's pretty simplistic, all right? And for the last one, with V sub D equals negative 10 volts, the thing more or less is conducting a very small amount of current. So we have essentially your I sub D being equal to negative 1 microampere, because it's more or less constant here, which is a very, very small value. And if you were asked, what is the equivalent resistance in the negative, all right, region where the thing is not supposed to be conducting? Well, there is still an equivalent resistance, and it's a very, very high value, which means that it's basically pretty much not conducting. So negative 10 divided by 1 microampere, we have an equivalent resistance for this last one of 10 megaohms, if my brain calculates it correctly. Okay? So look at that resistance value, all right? 10 megaohms, 10 million ohms, which, you know, is hardly a path for electricity to flow. Okay? All right. Are there any questions about this? Pretty straightforward and simple enough, right? Okay? Any questions? Aray, may init yung kape. Tanong, nandyan pa ba kayo? Hello? Right now. Sige. All right. Thank you. So let's go forward with this. This is fairly simple. Okay? A more complex model, all right, takes into consideration the fact that the diode is likely to be used in a way that there is some kind of signal on it. All right? As the cue point or coefficient point, all right? Quoestient point or cue point, all right, of the operation. And we expect, for example, that we are going to have some kind of a signal on it. And as the signal increases and decreases in magnitude, the result will be that we will get a slight shift in the cue point, all right, or the coefficient point of the diode. So this signal goes along and the result, right? For example, with I sub d varying, all right, we are going to get a resulting change in the diode's forward voltage as well, all right? Now, given that it is an exponential curve, dependent on where we are and how big this magnitude is, we expect to see some small deviation in V sub d. Again, of course, to be able to determine this more exactly, you actually need to have the actual diode conduction curve to be able to derive it. Okay? But bottom line is, based on this dynamic condition, all right, changing condition, we can calculate an approximate equivalent resistance value as a single representative of this dynamic operating point with finite limits. Okay? So it's very, very important that, you know, this is well defined. What is this biggest and smallest value? Where will it intersect the conduction curve? And those intersection points can be used to calculate the equivalent resistance of the diode. Again, of course, it is only an approximation. It will be somewhere in that range, okay? It will be somewhere in that range of which we see here, okay? Now, the important thing to take note, all right, is that the calculation, all right, the calculation is going to result in an R sub d, which is representative of the tangent to those two points, those two extreme points on the curve. It will be a tangent value, which is represented essentially by this particular equation. Okay? Okay? Okay? Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. notice that there's that 26 millivolts thing over there. Okay? All right. Okay? So of all things, this dynamic resistance value is pretty easy to actually calculate because for all the complexity, all right, as long as you are within this exponential kind of characteristic here, this V sub D is just being approximated to 26 millivolts, which is kind of weird actually. Okay. But anyway, that's how it's done. And so, well, personally, I don't use this as an approximation because it's not a particularly good way of doing it. All right? Now, the other calculation is the use of the average AC resistance. So the result is tangential to the line. Here, we're taking the average AC resistance, all right? And it is essentially determined by the straight line drawn between the two intersection points for the max and min values for the current, all right? So from there to there, okay, notice how the equation is a little bit different. Here, we're really using the delta VB, all right? Which is what you'll get from looking at this intersection points. You get the voltage here and you get the voltage here. You squint as best as you can, as with the small little eyes are at a major disadvantage. Okay? That is what you then substitute over here into delta VB. And then you, of course, get the max and the min currents. And that's your delta I sub D. And you calculate your equivalent AC average resistance. Okay? So the average resistance is a point that is here. All right? Whereas this other equation, all right, this other equation, this 26 millivolts over I sub D calculates a point that is basically here. It's tangential with the line. So there's a small difference in the resulting value. All right? And either one, all right? Either one is a better representation for the expected slight amount of dynamics associated with the diode in operation when you have a signal on it. Okay? And again, this is sort of expected, all right, you are expecting to use a diode with some kind of a signal. Because if not, then the diode is not really being used for anything. All right? So here again is the representation. So if you like. So DC or static is a signal point. AC or dynamic is essentially the tangential representative point for a system that has a signal that's always changing. All right? And the average AC basically calculates pretty much the same thing except that it is basically representing it as a linear function between the two extreme points. Okay? All right. So there you go with that. Okay? So at this point, of course, you're wondering, okay, what the hell is this? What do I use this for? Well, for all intents and purposes at this point, maybe, maybe, to be totally honest, it is good to know so that you know how to answer the questions in the quiz. Okay? Based on the question, there could be three different questions. Yet, we are sub-d equivalent for DC or static conditions for this particular diode operating with this current. Ayan, ganyan. Okay? So, So, para lang maisagot ang tanong sa quiz. Okay. All right. Okay, docks? Okay. So, let's go forward. Okay? We'll be using those equations a little bit over here. Again, where do we, what do we do? So, in, in, there are basically a few ways by which we can use our knowledge at this point to rapidly calculate or determine the resulting output of a circuit with a diode in place. So, that's important, I guess, to develop your knowledge. And more importantly, it is for you to be able to understand when and how to use a diode. Okay? So, we're going to be starting and looking at the operation of the diode. All right? And what you need to basically be able to understand is, ah, ito pala ang effect ng diode. All right? And because you hopefully understand that, when you encounter a situation where here's the input signal and this is the resulting output signal that I need, how do I need? How do I get from this output signal that I need? How do I do it? And maybe you'll be able to recall and say that, ah, I can use a diode or some diodes in a certain configuration to get from this input signal to this resulting output signal. Okay? So, again, that's what's important. It's just like you've understood resistors. Okay? And hopefully understood capacitors and inductors. These are components or devices that will help or provide you with the necessary signal manipulation to get from point A to point B. Okay? All right. So, let's look at this. Okay? So, the ideal diode, all right, would have a conduction curve that looks like this. Conduction and non-conduction curve. So, in an ideal diode, it is going to start conducting immediately even at zero volts. All right? And it will conduct fully without any resistive characteristic at all. So, the ideal diode, all right, has this. And when it is reverse biased, it will be essentially an open circuit. So, the ideal diode acts as a true on-off switch that automatically closes when we have current flowing in the correct open close quote direction and automatically opens when current attempts to flow in the opposite direction. Okay? So, we hope that the switch will basically close. Ah, sorry. All right. In the opposite direction, it remains an open circuit. And when the current is going to try to flow in the correct direction, it becomes a closed switch with zero zero resistance. So, it's an ideal diode. Okay? And as we said, unfortunately, there is no such thing as an ideal diode. We can only build devices, all right, that approximate that particular transfer characteristic. Okay? Okay. All right. So, we've already gone through this. We're okay with this. So, let's go to a slightly better approximation. Okay? So, now that we understand the characteristics of an ideal diode, how can we make an equivalent circuit model that better approximates the real diode? So, here is a slightly more complex model where we modify, all right, and add to the ideal diode diode with a simple 0.7 volt source, all right? This is for a silicon diode, by the way, all right? This is an approximation for a silicon diode, kaya 0.7 yan, all right? So, how does this work as a model, all right? Recall that our ideal diode begins conducting right at zero volts, whereas a real diode will have a curve that looks a little bit more basically like this. Okay? Mas gan to ang itsura, and we say that, oh, well, it really begins to conduct very well at 0.7. Okay? All right? So, it's a bit too far, especially here in this particular drawing where it's, I've made it in such a way that it's extremely visible. Okay? So, one way that we can approximate that is to have this additional 0.7 volts here, all right? Remember, the ideal diode starts conducting at zero, but by adding 0.7 volts, all right? By adding 0.7 volts here, we artificially increase the amount of voltage needed before the diode begins conducting. So, instead of zero, we need to get to above or equal to 0.7 so that the resulting voltage across our ideal diode will become zero volts. Okay? So, notice, for example, all right? So, as I stated here, the current is attempting to flow in the correct direction. It's the same direction as the diode arrow, all right? The symbol's body is showing. So, pareho ang direction. So, this current will make the diode conduct, it's the correct direction. Okay? Normally, all right, the diode, the ideal diode will conduct already with even just zero volts across. But, okay, if we have actually zero volts across this, all right, if we actually have zero volts across this plus minus, you'll notice that the resulting KVL, all right, if you do a KVL here, this is not going to be zero. So, if we're zero here and we're KVL, all right, zero volts is the equivalent of saying that this is shorted, by the way, all right? If you do a KVL across here, you'll find that the voltage across the diode will be negative 0.7. So, as far as the ideal diode is concerned, ang nakikita niya is negative 0.7. And because it's a negative voltage, it will not actually conduct. So, for this whole region from here to here, our diode is not conducting at all because it sees a negative voltage. And only when the voltage here reaches 0.7, does the voltage across the diode become zero volts. And that's the point that our ideal diode will actually start conducting. Do you guys follow, all right? And so, because of that, the resulting transfer function, the conduction curve looks like this, where our model now has a better approximation of the real-world diode, because now its conduction characteristic basically looks like this, which is closer to the real-world diode, okay? So, model 2 with a constant voltage drop, okay? Is a better approximation of our real-world silicon diode because it includes that small voltage requirement, although, all right, that dynamic characteristic and the fact that it actually starts conducting at 0.5 and then there's that exponential characteristic is not, of course, part of what it will allow you to see, okay? All right. So, are there questions about this? May tanong ba? Questions? Nobody is answering. Do I get the thumbs up? Are we following? No problem? Okay. Sige. So, let's go forward. Finally, we have the most complex model of all, which is the simplified piecewise linear approximation. So, we add another element into our equivalent where we add an equivalent resistance. Our R sub D that we were talking about a little while ago, okay? So, with the V sub D conduction of whatever, 0.6 or 0.7 volts, all right, we put another element so that that vertical line, all right, this vertical line here can be tilted by the equivalent R sub D. So, putting in a small resistance will tilt the transfer function, all right? It will tilt the transfer function so that it does a better approximation of the exponential characteristic of the real diode, okay? We can choose our V sub D to be a little bit less than 0.7 so that mass better, okay? So, this is the most complex of the models and it is the maybe the, you know, one with the best fidelity to a real-world exponential function starting at about 0.5 or 0.6 volts, okay? All right. So, the whole idea behind these three different models is dependent on the situation and how well you want to approximate the transfer function, you choose the model which best suits your requirement. So, the second, sometimes, you choose the signal levels. You choose the signal levels. You choose the signal you choose the signal levels, which makes it very, very easy to visualize what the resulting output of the diode will be, all right? If the signal levels are smaller and you want to take into consideration the fact that the diode really doesn't start conducting until about 0.6, 0.7 volts, then you might use model two. And of course, that requires a little bit more mental calculation because now you're taking it into consideration, ah, when it will reduce the output by about 0.7 volts, what will happen, what will happen, what will be the signal. And then, the most critical or the more critical situation where you really need to get a better approximation, you might use model three. And in this particular case, if you are using model three, then you would probably need to involve the use of a calculator, cannot be seen, because here you're including the resistance equivalent effect, which means that you'll need to be using a little bit of calculation. So, more complex model, more difficult, but better approximation, okay? And all of these are still highly simplified against the actual conduction curve, okay? All right. Now, sige. So, are there questions so far? So, let's try using this knowledge, okay? Let's try using this knowledge. Oh, ito na. Oh, so kung iniisip nyo, ay, ba't natin kailangan na? Eh, kasi para masagot yung mga quiz question. Okay. All right. So, let's try this. Let's try this. Let me just check the time. All right. Let's try this. So, here we have a voltage of 10 volts, E sub 1. All right. Going into a bunch of resistors and a single diode over here. And E sub 2 is negative 5 volts. You notice that we're starting with a fairly complex looking problem already, okay? What you're asked to do is to determine your I1, okay? I sub 1, V sub 1, V sub 2, and V sub 0 with the diode, all right, being modeled as an ideal diode with a 0.7 volt voltage source. Remember that model 2 basically looks like this, okay? So, ganito ang itsura ng model 2 natin. Okay. So, we have an ideal diode, all right, and a 0.7 volt voltage source, all right, for our model 2, okay? So, can anybody attempt to get the answer for this, all right? So, ano lang to, okay? Paano siya kinakalculate, all right? So, can anybody determine how this is calculated? Okay. You might want to use, okay? Teka, hindi ko dapat sasagutin kasi this is a mental challenge for you guys, okay? So, galing kayong Citron 1, okay? Galing kayong Citron 1. So, dapat kain yung gawin to, all right? You should be able to do this. It might look a little bit confusing because you might be more used to seeing the problem expressed this way. This is 10 volts, all right? Going into a 4.7 k resistor, going into our diode, okay? Going into our diode, and this is where your V sub O is taken, all right? And this other side of the diode goes into a resistor, which is 2.2 k, which goes into another voltage source, which is minus plus, like so, and we're just going to write this as 5 volts like this, okay? All right? All of this, all right, is probably, all right? There are two ways of interpreting this, but I'll just choose one so that it makes life easy, all right? All right? All right? All right? So, yan yung circuit natin. Yan yung circuit natin. Here's our V sub O, okay? And that is also, ano ba yung V sub 2 rito? Ah, V sub 2 is the voltage across resistor number 2. Okay? V sub 1 is the voltage across resistor number 1. Okay? All right? And V sub O is the voltage from the takeoff point, V sub O, basically to our reference ground. Okay? So, yun yung V sub O natin. From here to ground. Okay? All right? So, what are the answers? Ah, nasan ang I? Ayun. Okay? So, our I is the current that's flowing through. Well, it is just a single series circuit anyway, so there's only one current that's flowing. So, can anybody actually calculate... This is ridiculously simple actually. It's a very easy calculation. So, can anybody tell me what the values are for I1, V1, V2, and V sub O? Or is that zero? I'm not sure. Mukhang zero pala. Anyway, but yeah, what the hell? Anybody? Anybody? Pwede niyong ipasok dito sa chat natin. If you want to answer only one of the questions or whatever, but one point here is that this is a series circuit. So, if you manage to get one of the answers, that means that you basically can answer all of them actually. So, anybody? volunteers, please? Okay? Paano natin isosolve yan? Teka. I'm going to check, ha? Baka naman nandito yung sagot. Oh, he doesn't want to show the answer. Okay. What the hell? Oh, sige. Anyone? Man? Managano ba yun? So, ibig sabihin pala kung ginawa ko itong... If we were face to face and I were to give out a pop quiz right there and then, everybody will not be able to answer. O tinatamad lang ngayon? Okay. Meeting number two pala ito. Hello? Anybody? Can somebody form the KVL equation, please? Starting here. Let's start here. Let's form the KVL. All right? Let's form the KVL. We know that it's 10 volts. So, therefore, the current will probably be going in the clockwise direction. All right? And let's try to form the KVL equation. Anybody? What's the KVL equation? Unmute. Para marinig. Random person. Anybody? All right. Sino si Gian Bolado? Andito ka ba? Gian, you're listed here as a participant. Okay. Oh, somebody gave me a direct message. No, no, no, no, no. Can't be that large a value. Okay. Gabriel, can't be that big. Okay. Just look at the values here. You can tell, all right? It's kilo ohms, right? It's kilo ohms and you're working with very, very small voltages. So, you expect your answers to be milliampere. It can't be that big. All right? It cannot be that big. Alright. Alright. Alright. you might have to move the decimal place around a little bit. Try again. Sige. Was I calling a while ago? Wala. Ah, okay. 2.128 milliampere. All right? Let's find out if you're right. I don't know what the answer is. Okay, I don't know what the answer is. But somebody here says, okay, by a direct message, it's 2.128 milliampere down. Okay, let's find out. Is I equal to 2.128 milliampere? Question mark. All right? So let's see. So if we follow this as a KVL, all right, follow this as a KVL, we'll get negative 10, all right, starting at dot. At the dot. Okay? Negative 10. All right? And because we only have one current, okay, we can say plus I times 4.7 K, all right? Going through the ideal diode, which has a voltage E drop of 0.7. Okay? So that is going to drop 0.7. Okay? Tama ba? All right? 0.7 volts. Okay, this is your diode. So I times 2.2 kilo ohms, okay, minus 5 is equal to 0. Okay? So this is your KVL equation. Hopefully, I haven't made a mistake. All right? And so we can move our voltage constants over to the right side. Okay? And that is going to be equal to negative 14.3 volts. Tama ba? Minus 10 minus 5 is negative 15. Ah, positive pala because we move it to the other side. All right? So 15 minus 0.7 is 14.3. All right? We move it to the other side. It becomes a positive value. And then what's left on the left side is going to be I times 4.7 K plus 2.2 K. All right? And of course, you can now calculate this and say that this is 14.3 volts divided by 6.9 kilo ohms. All right? So there's your answer for I. All right? 7, 8, 9, 4, 5, 6. All right? 14.3 over 6.9 kilo ohms. Okay? All right. So let's find out what the resulting current is. All right? Sorry. I shouldn't have boxed that yet. 14.3 divided by 6,900 is 2.0. Bakit di ba yung lumabas? Okay? 2.072. How many decimal places do we need anyway? All right? 7 to 5 milliampere. Okay? So ito yung sagot. Round it off as required. All right? Yeah. That's correct. Okay? 2.0725 milliampere. Once you have this, this is just a question of substituting the current to get the different voltages. So as a result of that, V1 is equal to 2.0725 milliampere. All right? Times 4,700. This gives you 9.74 volts. Okay? We can also calculate V2. All right? V2 is 2,200 times 2.0725. And that gives you 4.55 or 5.6. All right? Volts. Okie doks. All right? So we now have our V1. We have our V2. We have our I. Ano pa ba ang kailangan natin? The only thing that we need basically now is V sub 0. And what is V sub 0 going to be? Okay? So some people may find this or get the wrong answer for V sub 0. All right? You'll notice that we can substitute 4.56 volts here. All right? We have 4.56 volts. Therefore, V sub 0 is basically equal to this plus this. All right? You'll notice that they're in opposing directions. They're on opposing directions. And so we can say that V sub 0, if you want to do a KVL on that, that's fine. But there's no need to. You can see that the voltage is from here down to here. So I have negative 5 plus 4.56. All right? So the result is a slightly negative voltage of 0.44 minus 0.44 volts. Okay? So ito yung mga sagot dito sa problem na to. Sana hindi ako nagkamali. All right? Okay. Are there questions? Okay? Are there questions? Hang on. Let me just fix the air conditioner swing here. It's warm. Okay? Are there questions? Okay. Okay, Payo? Yes. Diane? Sir, when we're given a question like this, do we always assume po na silicon yung diode or give it a look? Okay. That's a good question. No, don't do that. In this particular case, it's clearly stated that it's a silicon diode. So please keep that in mind. All right? Keep that in mind that dependent on the problem, there should be some statement or some piece of information that tells you what you need to use as a substitute. Okay? Maybe there's going to be an overall statement. Assume that all diodes are silicon or something like that. Okay? Okay? Okay. Other questions? If it's a germanium diode, then, well, typically the assumed voltage is about 0.3. Depends on, there's high variability. It's 0.3 or 0.4. For silicon, it's 0.6 or 0.7 as the usual voltage. Okay? Okay? All right? Okay? All right. See you again. Oh, by the way, one thing that I'd like to clarify now, when we talk about V sub D, all right, don't assume that V sub D refers to the forward voltage of the diode. V sub D, looking at the letters here, is simply the voltage across the diode. Okay? It's just the voltage across the diode. So, V sub D could be a very large value if the voltage across the diode is reverse biasing the diode. It could be negative 10 volts. It could be minus 5 volts. All right? It could be minus 20 volts. Okay, dogs? So, the real voltage, yeah, this is sad. Okay? This one here, this is not really a very good way of representing it. Most of the time, we will say, or it's usually approximate, or the forward voltage of the diode is usually defined. Using these letters, V sub F. All right? But anyway, don't worry about it for now. All right? Don't worry about it for now. Because we'll try to be a little bit more clear when defining and giving a problem, for example, in the quiz. It would be more explicitly stated as a, assume a forward conduction voltage of blah, blah. Right? Or assume that it is a germanium, blah, blah, operating at this point. Para alam nyo. Okay? Sige. Other questions? Other questions? Okay tayo? All right? So, this one is easy. All right? Going forward further to load line analysis. Just a quick check on time. 30 more minutes. All right? Load lines basically determine the operating point of circuit. circuit. We will be using this term again and again. Starting here and going forward even with transistors. All right? So, the load of a circuit, by definition, determines the region of operation of the components in the circuit. Usually, more referring to the semiconductors in the circuit. Okay? So, in this particular case, since we're talking only of having knowledge of a single semiconductor type, which is diode, it would be referring to the load line would be associated with the operating conditions of the diode in a circuit. Okay? Okay? There could, of course, be more than one diode in the circuit that are being presented, and each one would have a particular load line associated with it. Okay? So, what does a load line do? A load line or load line analysis is a graphical method of determining the operating points of the diode in the application or in the circuit. Okay? It's a graphical method, very much essentially as this, where you're determining intersections and drawing lines and stuff like that. Okay? Okay? So, how do we use it? Now, why is it being introduced? Well, because load line analysis, being graphical in nature, is easy to work with. All right? It's easy to use. All right? That's why it's being introduced. So, what's the method? Okay? Okay? So, a line is drawn against the characteristic of the device using the maximum voltage and maximum current points on the x and y axis. All right? Okay? So, the intersection point gives the operating point of the diode itself. Okay? Now, this sounds very, very up in the air, if you like. Okay? So, let's look at a particular example. Okay? Okay? So, here is an example of a load line analysis. So, right now, of course, we thought you would understand what the hell it is. But here's the idea. If you have a circuit, and if you have, well, and in this particular case, we are interested in seeing what the diode operating point is. So, you have to have a diode conduction curve characteristic. So, I have the circuit. I have the parameters of the circuit. Here's a voltage. Here is the resistance value. Here is the diode. And the diode's characteristic curve looks like this. All right? And the question might be, what's the operating point of the diode? Okay? What would be the operating point of the diode? Notice that this is not particularly easy to answer. All right? If you want to get a very exact answer. So, we have model 1, model 2, and model 3. Which are all approximations. We can get a clearer, not clearer, but we can get a more exact answer if we actually have the conduction curve of the diode. Okay? Okay? But you'll notice that if you have the conduction curve of the diode, it is difficult for you to find out what the exact operating point is. because there is a forward conduction voltage for the diode which varies with the current. Sorry, this doesn't look very, very vertical. So this is going to give you a slight variation in the forward voltage of the diode. And you'll notice that if you attempt to do a KVL of this particular circuit, I'll just redraw it so that it's larger. Okay, here's the diode and here's the resistor. Okay, let's say I have 10 volts here and this is a 1 kilo ohm resistor and I have a silicon diode here, all right, for which we might know the exact characteristic. We still cannot easily determine something as simple as how much current is flowing. Okay, so for example, yan lang yung problem. Determine I. Okay, how much current is flowing? It should be a very easy thing because it's a single KVL series loop, right? You just write it out. But here's the problem. When you try to write it out, okay, you'll find that you're stuck with an unknown value because you would write it as minus 10 plus V sub F, which is the diode forward voltage, all right, plus I times 1K is equal to zero. Okay, so ayan na yung I mo. Kaya mo na dapat isolve yan except for the fact that you'll find that I is equal to 10 minus V sub F divided by 1 kilo ohm. Okay, so if you look at this equation, you have this unknown value, which is the forward voltage of the diode. Now, the problem here is the forward voltage of the diode is also dependent on how much current is flowing through the diode. So depende sa current na nagpo-flow sa diode, iba-iba ang forward voltage niya. Gets nyo? All right? So chicken and egg problem. Deb, you're actually attempting to solve for two variables, all right, because these two are actually interactive or related to each other because of this transfer function. Okay? So that's why, all right, we have this load line analysis. Okay? That's why we have this load line analysis because it allows you to solve for these interactive linear, semi-linear equations, all right, by just doing something extremely simple. All right? Which is basically as follows. We draw a straight line. So here's that transfer function. Okay? We draw a straight line from the maximum possible current, which is voltage divided by the resistance, ignoring the voltage drop across the diode. That gives you your maximum possible current. Okay? And drawing a line all the way down to here where the current across the diode is zero. Okay? And the basis of where you put this is essentially just simply the maximum voltage that the system has. In this case, it would be 10 volts because that's what we assume here. Okay? Ito yung 10 volts natin. So that's where you put the other line. So here it is the maximum possible current. Over here, it's the maximum possible voltage. You draw a line and you see where it intersects. And that intersection point, magically, will be the current that is going to flow through the diode and the expected voltage across the diode. Okay? That's it. So you've solved this problem without actually doing the complex equation at all and not being able to figure out ano kaya magiging forward voltage niyan kasi hindi ko alam kung ano yung current nadadaan. All right? And it turns out that it's just simply that. You can use just simply the maximum possible current with the assumption that the diode's voltage is zero. All right? As well as the maximum possible voltage across the diode, draw a straight line and the intersection point gives you your answer. Okay? So this is what we call as load line analysis. So you notice, it's very easy to use and it rapidly gives you the answer. The only problem, of course, with it is that it is reliant on you being able to estimate the values and the accuracy of the graph itself. Okay? So this is like looking at the oscilloscope and squinting and saying, ah, more or less, ito yung voltage niyan based on where it's intersecting, more or less, ito yung voltage. Okay? You notice that you can get a more, possibly more accurate answer if you've had the oscilloscope with the cursors and you're able to move the cursors because that's going to give you a more exact, you know, a straighter line or whatever. But I guess it's the same thing here. You have to have an accurate graph. You have to have a good graph that is properly scaled. All right? It's properly scaled and you have to have good eyes and good approximation to get the answer. But at least, all right, it gives you a pretty good approximation of the answer. Okay? So, oops! And of course, here I am again. This is exactly what has happened. Okay? I've gone ahead and told you all about what is happening here on this slide. Okay? So, as you notice, okay, the problem, you can get the result, all right, if you have your intersection points. So, when the diode voltage is zero, you're going to get a maximum current of voltage source divided by resistance alone, that's where you'll put this particular point. This is E over R, all right? And when the current across the diode is zero, it will be when the voltage alone is being assumed. That's where you're going to put that other point and then you just draw the line. Okay? All right. So, plotting the two points where V sub D is equal to zero and I sub D is equal to zero on the curve will give you the diode operating point or coefficient point, Q point. Okay? All right? So, the technique solves a dual equation graphically. All right? So, there you go with that. So, here's an example. Okay? Example of using our graphic technique. All right? Determine VDQ, IDQ, and V sub R. Okay? All right? Sige nga, itry nga natin. All right? Determine VBQ, IDQ, and V sub R. So, what is VBQ again? VBQ is the diode voltage coefficient point. All right? We're assuming in this case that it will be forward bias. What is the current that's expected to flow across the diode at that coefficient point? And what is the resulting voltage across the resistor? Okay? For the given values here, you'll notice that E is equal to 10 volts, R is equal to 1K ohm. All right? And we're on the assumption here that we have a relatively accurate transfer function being shown. All right? okay. So, as you can see, it's already been partially solved here. We can determine the maximum current I max is equal to, all right? Ano ba ang maximum current? Well, the maximum current happens when V sub V is equal to zero. The diode forward voltage is zero. And so, that is simply equal to, if voltage across the diode is zero volts, then the full voltage gets impressed across the resistor. This is going to be equal to 10 volts, all right? And so, therefore, the current through the circuit is going to be equal to 10 mA. Okay? So, that's why there's this dotted line here, kasi ito na yung sagot, partially. Okay? So, at 10 mA, the forward conduction of the diode is going to be 0.8 volts according to this graph. But that's not where it's going to be. That's not our IDQ. Okay? Hindi pa yan IDQ at hindi yan ang VDQ na in-expect natin kasi hindi pa natin ginagawa yung load line. All right? So, we have to determine to get your E max, all right, which is equal to a certain value where our I across the diode is 0. Okay? And that will happen. I is equal to 0. That will happen when there's basically no current flowing. Therefore, the maximum voltage across the diode when there's no current flowing is going to be equal to 10 volts. All right? So, that is going to be somewhere over there at 10 volts and then you'll have to draw the line. Okay? So, you're going to be drawing the line and finding out where that is going to intersect. That's going to be actually somewhere up here. All right? I think. All right? So, plotting two points will give you your intersection for your Q point. Okay? Now, unfortunately, that graph was putol kasi nandito yan, nasa outside your monitor. Okay? Outside of your monitor. So, I think we have a different graph presented here, which gives you everything. Ayan! Okay. So, ito yun. All right? Umabot siya dito sa 10 volts. We draw the intersection. We draw the line and get the intersection. And as you can see, the intersection point happens all the way up there. And he's been approximated at 9.25 milliamp years. And I don't really know if anybody can really see it that well, are you going to be able to say, oh, that's 0.78 volts. Pero if you can, then ang galing ng mga mata ninyo. Okay? But anyway, there's the answer. Okay? There's the answer for that question. Again, this is very, very dependent on how good you are at squinting and drawing the lines and estimating, ah, that's about 0.767 volts or whatever. Okay? Alright. Questions? Mag-tanong. Okay? May-tanong ba? Anybody? Anybody? Question? Question? Okay. Tanong? Tanong? Tanong? Wala? Wala? Sigurado? Okay? Mag-thumbs up tayo kung okay tayo? Hello? Yeah? Okay. Very good. Excellent. Sige. So, let's go forward. Will the graph be scaled if we're ever to answer this in an exam? Eh, syempre, eh, paano kung nga? Anong klase yun? Alright. You guys have very strange questions. Okay. You guys have very strange questions. Okay. Mapraning kayo masyadong. Alright. Repeat the problem using the simple SI model. Simple silicon model. Okay? Alright? Model two. Alright? Model two. Okay? Model two. Ano ba yung nakasulat dito? Model one? Paano ba? Nang Roman numerals ba tayo sa model one, model two, model three? I don't remember. Let's just check. Ah, yeah, it's in Roman numerals. Okay, so you'll notice. Okay, so let's go over here and get this thing correctly. SI model. Sorry, what a mess. Erase all inks on this side and say that this is supposed to be model two. Okay, model two. Ayan, okay? So, same operating conditions, E is equal to 10 volts, E sub r is equal to 10 media amperes. Simple SI model. I uses the ideal diode and 0.7 volts for forward conduction. Okay, so this is very, very simple. All right, it's very, very simple because model two is, again, a very straightforward transfer function that just looks like this. Okay, so and assumes that the forward conduction voltage is simply equal to 0.7 volts. Okay, so this is kind of too easy. All right, because it's the same problem, 10 volts going into our diode, going into our 1 kilo ohm resistor. Okay, and we have our V sub r here. Okay, and we do this and obviously the current is flowing in the correct direction and so our diode will conduct and it will conduct with a 0.7 volt voltage drop. V sub V is equal to 0.7. All right, so we're going to get that and so we will see that V sub r, I'll skip the KVL because you already know this, 9.3 volts. Okay, and because we know that we have 9.3 volts across the resistor, we can easily calculate our current. I is equal to 9.3 volts divided by 1 kilo ohm which gives us 9.3 milliampere. Okay, so there you go with that. Those are our answers. All right, so 9.3 milliampere with V sub r equal to 9.3 volts. 9.4 million. All right, and comparing that to the more exacting answer that we get from our load line analysis and, you know, very, very sharp eyes with the ability to super humanly estimate the values. All right, we can see that there is a slight difference in the amount of current expected 9.25 milliampere and also the resulting voltage obviously across the resistor given the slightly different voltage drop basically means that, you know, the calculations there would be or the results would be a little bit different, very, very close to each other but not exactly the same at all. All right, not exactly the same. All right, so are there questions about this? So this is fairly easy stuff. Sana ganun kadali yung matanong sa quiz. Siyempre hindi. Okay. All right, so that's any questions people? Letting load line, no? All right, you can still use load line analysis in this particular case but there's no need to repeat the example last last one that we're going to take up. This one's a joke. Repeat the example using the ideal diode. Kung ideal diode, eh, medyo sobrang dali, di ba? All right, kung 10 volts yan, kung ideal diode, the ideal diode does not drop any voltage. The V sub B is equal to zero. Okay? So in that case, you're going to get basically the full voltage across the resistor. So therefore, V sub R is equal to 10 volts and of course, the resulting current that's going to be flowing is simply equal to 10 volts over 1k which is equal to 10 milliampere. Okay? So again, a different set of values because of the approximations that are assumed based on the problem statement provided. Okay? All right. So easy stuff. Are we good, people? Okay, are there questions here? Okay? What a joke. Okay. All right? Okay. And so we will continue with the rest of the explanations and sample problems. The sample problems here are being given so that you're just becoming familiar with how the diode operates. Okay? You just have to get used to looking at it. Okay? So very, very quick sneak peek. If you look at this here and I were to ask you, maybe there's two minutes left, but okay, just have a look at this. And if you know your bananas, oranges, and apples, you should be able to answer this very, very quickly. Determine V sub D2, I sub D, and D sub 0. Sino ang may kayang sumagot nito ng mabilisan? Just look at it and you should be able to answer it. Very, very quickly. You don't even need a calculator. Anong ang sagot nito? Alin dyan yung 0? 0 is equal to V D2. Are you sure? You're close, but think a bit more about it. It's not. It's not. But you're somewhere there. Okay? Okay? All right? So V D2 is not 0. It's not. V D2 is negative 12. All right? V sub O is 0. And I sub D is 0. Okay? All right? So those are the answers there. Okay? So anyway, we'll get to this. We'll start with this slide in the next meeting. Okay? Our next meeting is on Monday. All right? Our next meeting is on Monday, but there is going to be a lab class. We have a scheduled lab class at 11. Okay? For those who are on the Thursday lab schedule. So we are going to meet very, very briefly because we still have, you know, it's still a lab meeting. But, you know, again, as I said, face-to-face or online, we'll do the same thing anyway, which is basically pretty gross to nothing. All right? So if your lab class is today, please log in at 11. All right? And if it's not, then the next time I will see you is on Monday. All right? We'll continue with this on Monday. Thank you. So goodbye.
