With the idea of that and see how their appetite. So far, said The only things that you've learned are you know, one of the uses of a transistor. But they can be used in many different ways using the same concept of the fact that they are able to skate. Well, we know now that the BJP is essentially take current device, the base current controls the collector current. That's the whole idea. You can come up with a lot of interesting YouTube. For something like this. Just like any other device that an amplification capabilities. So it does not follow a current in Corinth, all kind of thing. It's more of a voltage to control a correct device. Okay. One of these have been successfully employed to do not so difficult to be looking at a potential transistors are being used. So, hopefully sometime in the future, you'll be able to look at the circuit to be able to trace it out and figure out how it works. And then from there, if you are able to take a look at the surgeon and basically, understand how was work, You know, higher goal of being, he actually able to design 30th rather than just feel somebody else's ideas and filled with build and the skills and potentially being able to buy a circuit or for something to do the job, you needed. The actual, we're just trying to use a transistor to be able to turn on and off a particular which is represented by the four overs in for hear something else. Turn on or off. Just remember the people just to say, it's nothing in between not like a nap feel this paper. We just want to be able to use the transistor as an on-off switch. And so the goal in this particular case is to be able to put as much power from the stores into the Lord. If This Were something like the headlights of a car. For example, if you want to ask indication that something is happening, for example, would be the Horn of a burglar alarm for car alarm right now. They're investing on Polly or right if it were being switched on and off manually. Okay, so you don't want something where you turn it on, and it doesn't wind up as bright as expected because the switch is not doing a very good job. You don't want to be beeping, the horn and making it sound pathetic or broken because like, it should have. So, what's the going? Well, the goal is centrally is to minimize whatever losses, there are in the circumpolar. Most if not all of the Power of managers to get into the door, okay? So how do we do that? When we see a transistor I'm going to be any particular connecting, what were the BMV? Normally directly connected right through the collector. And of course, the year is the base and in this case we're representing the input signal which would be on or off signal be too driven by a particular, resistor connector to Sparkle quick. Reminder we focus our attention on looking at the efficiency and blocked for something like this will show you when it's proper to use to this kind of an npn transistor. And of course, you've heard of the DMV with you, we have not really focused on all the way up to now, and we're going to see if we a PNP is better suited again. We want it to be fully on or off right now. Okay, how many? Not if we have more people here. Okay, freaking ultimate before it's just a quick reminder if you have it within us, but there's already a pole sitting there telling you that Saturday and leave a 7:30 a.m. don't be late or I might be late but just remember I was elected. Very similar problem pizza. Please? What? All right. The rest of it probably would be announced right there and then okay. Feeding privilege data. A banana. Business park with a yellow pad for some whatever reason I went. Okay, okay. Okay, so if you don't follow direct sun, Okay, don't ask who it me, right? So wasting all that time just to ask him. Anyway, it's a 50. Stop the alarm company. Dental plan. Your answers are so far off that they are impossible. Check. IHOP. Gross mistake. The Supra is 21. Your answer is 500. May 13th 1017. I hate maintenance, man. Today. And maybe I should. All right, come on. What's my name of this date? Black guys are real. All right. You get the mega people answer for power. Negative power means that you look at it. Voltage s112orb democracy. Start small, NASA. Katie Holmes and value the perfume, a a tablet for sale. if you have a supply, 10 V. If you have, it is impossible that are more than Ma. Gay in Bleach Brave. I'm almost finished checking. I'm just checking the objectives right now. Text sexy. I don't know. Nothing. I I so unhappy but yet What we have here is what we call it. The low-side switch to get on the load side of the circuit, your load, this on the hittite ice. I miss that is connected to the positive Supply. Generally, speaking of How It's divided, which is the one that is connected to ground and preaching for bigger a shot. If it's best to use on M p.m. and we're going to look at 5, that is the case, right? All right, because you're supposed to be familiar with this. The idea here is to make sure that we can saturate or, or that we are able to provide this much power to the possible. We need to ensure that the president has turned on as completely as possible. AKA we make sure that the transistor actually saturate because voltage is mini bikes and want me to have a little boy. So that the primary reason and that is any voltage across The Collector 2, a m translate to power dissipation for the president's term. B is equal to be fine. I will be switching. The current bigger, the voltage across The Collector, 2 a m, the greater the power dissipation. This means that the president will also be a hot that would mean that you're bigger or more bulky because of Textra keeps taking this passage rate answer obviously is to grow my gift with a robot amount of Base to make sure that it has an adequate Supply under all circumstances. How big does the control signal have to be to serve, as well as you want to be looking at right now. So either I wait for you to give me the answer or we just dropped into drive right here. So the answer is voltage wise. Obviously, we have to be able to supply the base of a m voltage, as well as whatever, appears our resistor, which we are not yet, actually calculating as to why that's there is a birthday and obviously BBE. Plus, it's just the opposite condition, right? Past it less than b b e plus VR one and the idea here is that you're not going to be careful turning it on, because if you say that the forward walk and she's. .7, just remember that. That point seven represent a pretty sure I already have enough to start there. That's why we have a symbol. All right. Now, Calculating, for example, the losses for the switch, you can calculated based on the amount of power, right? So the lot is defined as you know, the situation that you're going to get compared to a direct connection without electronic just using a balloon for example, will provide the world with 12 volt. So the power to the lothians eventually simply 12 squared/ / be resistance of 4 which is 144/ / 36. All right, with our switch in place, however, that changes the equation. Because we're going to have the saturation voltage from collector diameter. So that only leaves us with a squared divided by four. And we also know all the power dissipation of the switch itself, I mentioned a while ago with you and voltage flowing through it because some of the voltage is already know so he can be in a meeting at the stadium. Going to turn directions. Follow the emperor's Arrow so I don't think we have to discuss that too much. Is that you need to calculate? That should be greater calculate current. The transistor Saturday to check the friendliest Place specification. If you have a nice present start FIFA curve, it would be represented. It's very normal fortresses stores. Very old be somewhere in the 325. A range. For example, a So the spec sheet for the day that she says, hey just went 3055 is I see. Max is getting a butt. a $70 for something you did because you know the operating Somewhere and you just want to make sure that I don't want them more than it should be okay, right? Or the other way of thinking about it, they used a very low value for the beta. When you do your calculations is your BNP president or where you're trying to use switch, the low-side switch. And if we do, so be a way to turn this thing on. Would be to pull the thing. You remember. Stop the Beat and beat current flow. Is from a m today because of the burn it off. You want to make sure that the base to every 3rd voltage is less than 64.5 idea. That's one of the big problems because if you take a look at this, this is Well with My Soul by Nature. If you don't have the switch connected with other side is also going to be at 12, that's how they say, stay off. Which means that there is normally going to be, this guy has to go get your physical 12 is also has to be important for the switch, to be for clear all the way to follow, right, to turn it on your speaker has to go to all the way to zero. So that its engine pull down all the way to Right? Even if you can manage to bring it down to zero, what is the result of zero? You still have your baby eat. Okay, and if you have your bb, he this makes this voltage at least. So, how many months do you have a problem 11.3? The previews switch configuration. How many volts do I need to pull up? Bb-blood, whatever mortgage. They have to be particularly to high voltage. That's more than enough And how do I turn it all the way down to zero below? Right when I turn it on, if this thing manager here, but the saturation voltage from a calamity, You follow datapoint 3 saturation. So, how many votes do I have a 311.3 vs 11.7? Well, the answer is the one that has lost their touch. More power arrives at the note, AMPM or PNP. Obviously if you want to do a switch and an empty and it's the better, hello. Okay, so so much for that idea. Know where can we use abmp? there is such a thing, however, at which witch is which on top okay, if we have a high five, Play next song. What is the best switch to use? Is it a PLC or an empty? Mpmp is better? So if I attempt to use an empty, are the only way to do it would be this way. And there's your buddy just like before. And now I have a date where this one is also connected to drop like this. A b c c o r r y a t or m p. M as ice ice cream. What things are PNP on the North side. If we attempt to do this was going to happen, over 131 maximum voltage to appear here that this site has to write on the way up. How high can a Kia Sportage that you can? Get it pretty much the big guy can go out to eat with a BB impact. B, b, e w Lower Buckeye. Uber. There's your PNP. And again, in 2015. Or your Hi-Fi twin you want. Okay. All right. We now introducing more complex application for switching. Okay, so this is fun. Let's try to look at this. B e a t t l e p. L e p l is equal to short for Benjamin. K outfits from a game or games or output from Michael controllers for microprocessors in robotics, for example, of all right, moving things using actuators Under Computer control basically and everyday kind of situation make a Tronics engineer. For example, this is essentially your breath in water. You have a digital microprocessor and microcontroller V time, Big girl electrical or electromechanical team. Even something for example, of opening the A car through after the person has stopped and said, I am qualified to park here. so, that's why you have your digital stuff, which qualifies as read the card, and then it sends an electrical signal to stop. Robot robot, right? Other things like what I just gave have similar requirements. We have, for example, of a robot, we have rotary motion for the wheels to make the robot, go on a date. So, busy motors, come in, various shapes, and sizes, and physically for the mobile robot wheels, for example. So it's not called the robot, unless there is something that makes you a robot. Not what? Right? What's what's the US Open RDP? We want to see to be intelligent, so it has to have a computer when it is a digital device or digital. Controller, make the DC motors. Do you probably know this interface requirements? Alright. Includes the following number one. A DC motor will turn clockwise or counterclockwise. Gate to take a smiley, the motor. And did you put the battery on it one way? It's okay. The other thing that you may not necessary, you know, is that it's the one that controls the amount of pork. people have the wrong impression that you know, the voltage, but it's not Write the reason that you probably have the impression that the voltage is because you know that if you put in a higher voltage, produced more power and the reason is simple going through the winding resistance, basically be over heart. Okay. Alright, but is actually the current it's the current that produces the magnetic field. All right, and you remember what's inside the motor, magnet in 20, you produce a bigger magnetic fields on the winding produces more power against the permanent magnets, RPM or how fast the motor speed is. If you think a DC motor, you put the battery. What what happened? Exactly right. You're not going to answer, right? Isn't that supposed to be blah blah? Alright, super alphabear, AKA Darlington hands in something creation. Okay, so this is the next 12 transistors together in a single dressing table. You have to trust his first year in q1 and Q2 taken as a whole as a super transistor collector base and a meter connection with your name. And your family name is not what how I wish we could have been back in 1951, you would have that, how does the thing basically work or what are the equation for to eat if you did? What is the equation for heat up to 71 in relation to HIV Sub-Q WhatsApp? What's in other words? What is the relation to ID for transistor? See what your You're, you're, you're you're thinking here when I eat versus IV is the standard is equal to data + 1. I'd be right, okay. And just remember that the beta is the beta of qf. So that there is a q w equal to 1 + basic you one just to be sure that you looking at the correct x. I d q1. And where the point here is if we all spoke with our and their son to IHOP, All right. What is that going to be equal to? Now, you'll notice that I out is at the amateur of cute and the base of 226 is Korean from. I e some together together. and because of that, there's two things that basically there something probably has to be. Okay, so the big current of Q2 comes from is a q1, but even if it were dead and not doing anything, this guy is worth any potatoes, then obviously it would also. FIFA Q 2 + 1. You tried to for that equation. Day and The Time to hurry up because it's almost 9 to come out, it's kind of it is basically going to turn out to be this one day when you spread it out in 4 minutes to current at the output of the two beta. Along with a sum of the individual. If you hook up this, which is the song of the beta, this one, which is the product of the right, which is why in the Darlington, you look at it and think about this one. Come stai. Which is to be complete. I like to compute everything you could factor into the two, which is why the P IP 130 at the IP 125 have 2,500 are clear over on. The product value is very, very big. Think about the first start having a beta of 102 second and sister having a 2025 So there you go. That's what essentially the Darlington configuration he is. So it is quite easy to achieve a high beta. What did we sacrifice make something good? Always an engineering valid. It's very, very seldom that we get everything good. We get something from nothing, no, it doesn't have a very high beta but on the other hand if you analyze its other characteristics, you might find you one thing. These include the forward voltage. Memphis are you tutoring? The Darlington. all right, which is analyzing the two video of the two Trans Am parts you need to have enough voltage to turn on both 252 because you remember that the configuration pasta to A M, I think I m going between two to turn it on forward instead of just points 7, you needed me 1.4 Not a big deal. We all right. The other thing. Alright, I got to race in Portage in a typical single 23 with if the Federation is taken at the collector to every 3rd, Saturday of the first guy off, the second one So, if this is. .3, BB is going 710. Your best possible saturation voltage. For the PS4 Port, Authority flooded Quite a bit of work. Is there any way around that go? Because that's how it's configured. Fleer tradition yokut quadrants are also quite a bit forward wallpaper. And go to the zoo story. Bring up the third is. Your feedback web how fast the transistor current turn on second floor if you're using audacity. In a normal situation, right? In the normal situation, with a single transistor. When you stop straight in by providing a large amount of current What happens if you think. They're so pretty. One that this thing is saturated, which means that there are a lot of electrons for example, in the bay there. All right, into the train. Right now so that there's no off the base of the transistor. How do you do that by removing Your photo. So you have a large number of electrons, and how do you do that? There's a fast for the electronics to get out because it would be sleeping Park. Got it right now in Arlington or whatever. Look at the situation. You're such a being which means that this guy is filled with electrons, and this guy is call Sophia Lee. When you want to 34. Okay. What does that mean? We're waiting for the thing. Now, here have a chance to go through this here. How did they get out? I know, you may think. it's only conduct in One Direction member so if the electrons flow in One Direction, please guy with act like Electronic key right track. Phoenix it fall apart without a hard time. Learning for kids cannot turn off quickly because there are no pass for the base everybody like one. They will eventually go for 3. It takes a hell of a lot longer because they are basically passing to any form of leaking. You might have to be a good, right? Forward voltage is Big saturation. Voltage is big. Speed particularly at 3rd off. Three-button versus increase Bass. Right. if you're not really looking at speech, Maybe the circuit doesn't require, you know. One last thing to have. A test light, even when you look at the data sheet, that's in the city. I be 120. The internal throwing have this tradition? So, there you go in. Now has apart slightly lower overall beta. Okay, so there you go. It's going. All right. Next meeting. We will look at the second compound configuration. Give me alarm, set alarm. Okay.
