I'm turning on the recording and here is where we left off from last time. There we are. Okay. Okay. So we should be good. I think, yeah, everybody can see this. All right. The question for this particular problem is determine VB2, IB, and V sub O or V sub zero. And we already actually talked a little bit about this at the very, very last part of the meeting last Thursday. So you'll notice that in this particular case, we have an attempt for the current to flow in the clockwise direction, given that we have a power source here of 12 volts. Okay. And so just to make it a little bit more visible, I can draw the voltage source over here. And we take note that this particular node is at 12 volts. So the hope current direction will be in the clockwise direction. And you'll notice that as far as that is concerned, we would be going in the same direction as the first diode here would allow. Whereas the second diode, because the current is flowing in the opposite direction that it would normally get with, the second diode is going in the second diode. The second diode is going to be in its non-conductive state. Okay. So the first one is going to be forward biased. Okay. Whereas this guy is going to be reverse biased. And because of that, it essentially acts as an open circuit. Okay. So we don't have a complete circuit there. Obviously, we can already answer that I sub D is going to be practically zero on that basis. Okay. So that's your first answer there. I sub D is going to be zero. I'm not going to place it as exactly zero because we know that even when a diode is reverse biased, it will still conduct a very, very small amount of negative current. Ano ba yung sinabi natin? Because these are silicon diodes, we expect the currents to be in the nanoampere's range. Okay. So it's going to be, you know, one nanoampere, 10 nanoampere. It's really going to be very, very small. So it's practically zero. Okay. All right. Because of that, we can say that because IR, we only have one city circuit here, our I sub R is also going to be equal to I sub D. And because that is practically zero, okay, therefore, IR is zero. Okay. And because IR is zero, then V sub R is equal to IR times 5.6K. And we can say that V sub R is going to be practically zero. All right. And because V sub R is practically zero, and we take note that V sub zero is equal to V sub R, we can also say that this one is practically equal to zero. Okay. All right. That leaves us with just one final question. What is the voltage for V D2? All right. So what is our voltage for V sub D2? This should be something that will sort of be a little bit more difficult to answer. Maybe I don't know. So could somebody volunteer if you could tell me what the expected voltage of V D2 is, given that we know that it's basically pretty much operating close to not practically an open circuit? What's V D2? Anybody? All right. Yeah. All right. So V D2, is it negative? All right. Is it negative? We notice that we have current attempting to flow in this direction, because current is attempting to flow in this direction, the polarity that we expect to see across these. By the way, it's a good guess here. All right. But there will be a voltage due to the voltage forward conduction characteristic of the first diode. Right. And we'll take note that that is silicon. And it doesn't say here how we're supposed to treat this thing. But the easiest one is to basically just follow model two. Okay. To be a bit more realistic, we'll use the model two as the basis here. And we expect then, because the conduction characteristic of a model two is like this. Okay. We're going to get about 0.7 volts across this guy. All right. So it's going to be 0.7 here. All right. And it stops right here. Therefore, we are going to have the equation V D2 is equal to 12 minus 0.7 volts, which gives us 11.3 volts. Okay. If you didn't quite follow that, you will KVL the thing. All right. KVL, so minus 12 plus 0.7 plus V sub D2. And we know that the voltage across R, okay, V sub R2, if you like, all right, is equal to 0. And because V sub R2 is 0, all right, then we are left with V D2 is equal to plus 12 minus 0.7, which gives us 11.3 volts. Okay. So that's the answer there. All right. 11.3 volts. Okay. All right. So all questions answered. They're pretty straightforward if you, you know, manage to figure out the trick behind it. Okay. Not really much of a trick there, but what the hell. So getting to know your diode characteristics, that's what it's going to turn out to be. Any questions? Are we okay with this, people? Questions? O, mga, ano, mga hindi pa maanda rin utak. Hello? Huwaga na. Gising na. Hindi pa gising. Ayan. O, ayan. O, kape, kape, kape. O. Questions? If there are no questions, can we have a thumbs up, please, from and verify that everybody gets this? Okay. Excellent. Okay. Let's go to the next slide. Okay. Here's another problem. Determine I1, VB1, VB2, and V0. Okay. All right. So what is the expected set of answers for this problem? Okay. At least this one, they've actually explicitly drawn a parse source now. Okay. So this one, what I hate about this is it's just a floating thing. For my brain, I have more difficulties thinking about it. But here we have an explicit voltage source. It's 10 volts. It's going into a 330-ohm resistor. I hate it when people write it this way. This is really awkward. So why not just that? Okay. Same value. So 330-ohms going into these two diodes over here. V sub D1, V sub D2, I1, and V sub O. Okay. Can you figure this one out? This one's easy. Right? It's easy. Does it make any difference that two diodes are in parallel with each other? So again, it does say that these are silicon diodes. They're basically pretty much the same characteristic. And again, for simplicity, we are going to assume that it's a model 2 for both of these diodes. All right. It's not a good idea to mix and match models because you're going to get really confused. So if you say that, okay, I'm going to use model 2 for it, then it must be model 2 for all the diodes because if not, you're going to get really weird answers. So model 2, again, the conduction characteristic of our model 2 basically is a 90 degree conduction beginning at 0.7 volts and then if ever anything on the opposite side, it basically follows the ideal diode, which is that it is open circuit regardless of how big the magnitude of the reverse bias is. Okay. All right. So how do we solve this problem? Is this hard or easy? All right. So if they have exactly the same characteristic, then we can expect that a current will attempt to flow I1 going around like so. Okay. And it will basically encounter this guy which will pull the voltage down so that it conducts and we know that the conduction voltage of the diode is basically 0.7 volts. All right. And so that's the voltage that we're going to get across here. the big question mark is what about this other one? Of course. All right. What about this guy? Well, if they have exactly the same conduction voltage, all right, 0.7 volts also, then because they are remember that as far as the simplification is concerned. All right. or even if not thinking about the simplification, even a real world diode, a more realistic characteristic is that its conduction characteristic can be thought of as load line analysis. All right. We can think of its conduction characteristic as having an equivalent resistance. So remember this one where we talked about the equivalent resistance in the conduction mode. So we have the static or DC type resistance. We have the AC or dynamic resistance or the average. Now, in this particular problem that we're looking at, okay, the obvious choice of the resistive characteristic is going to be that of the DC or static type resistance. Bakit? Eh, kasi ang source natin ng kuryente sa problem, all right, is a non-changing voltage source. Sorry, it's so far away. It's a non-changing DC voltage of 10 volts. We don't have any signal except for a steady state DC. So, the conduction characteristic, although it's modeled here, model 2 nga nakasulat, is a straight line upward, which means resistance is equal to zero. Even if you get a more realistic model, all right, if you change this to a model 3, then the curve is going to look slightly tilted, and you're going to have this intersection point, and they're going to be the same. It's the same model for both of these diodes. So, for whatever current is developed, all right, you can think of this as 0.7 plus a series resistance, all right, 0.7 all right, 0.7 plus a series resistance of R sub D for one of them, and then the other one is exactly the same, where we have another diode, well, diode, all right, which is emulated or substituted with a 0.7 volts, all right, along with a R sub D equivalent, okay, so there you go with that. Now, if they are exactly the same, all right, R sub D here is equal to the other R sub D, then we expect that I1 will basically branch off equally between the two points, okay, it's going to branch out equally between the two points, and so given that this is on the assumption that R sub D is 0, because we did say that it is a model 2, then we still hold the same characteristic that the current is expected to split equally between the two diodes. In other words, I sub D1 plus I sub D2 is equal to I sub 1. It will split equally between the two, so all we need to do now is basically calculate the current that's expected to flow, all right, and that is going to be given by the simple equation that I 1, all right, very good, thank you, is equal to, all right, how do I calculate it, all right, I have a 10 volt source minus 0.7 volts, forget the minus 0.7 because there's a voltage drop there, divided by 330 ohms, okay, all right, so that is equal to 9.3 volts divided by 330 ohms, and whatever that turns out to be, all right, so somebody here has done a very quick calculation, is it 0.03 amperes, is it 30 milliampere, let me just think for a while, okay, I'm poor with these things, no, I can't approximate it that quickly, all right, so 330, and it's very, very close to that, practically speaking, all right, so 0.0282, all right, so 28.2 milliampere, okay, so there's your exact, more exact answer, all of these are just, you know, floating points going around, yes, it's approximately 30 milliampere, correct, all right, Diane, thank you, and because it's approximately 30 milliampere, you just split it into two, all right, the voltage, voltage, I'm not correct, okay, voltage across D1 and D2 is 0.7 volts, okay, all right, bakit nga ganon, di ba, is it asking for BD1 and BD2 or is it asking for ID1 and ID2, labo naman ang tanong na to, bakit ganyan, all right, but yes, if you're asking for the current across the diodes, indeed, it is just 28.2 milliampere divided by two, all right, and so ID1 is going to be 14.1 milliampere, ID2 is 14.1 milliampere, and V sub zero is just taken across each of these diodes, this is a parallel circuit, and so therefore, we know that V sub zero is equal to 0.7 volts, all right, so that's your answer, okay, for this particular problem, okay, all right, so this is a question of getting used to it, it's not really difficult at all, just a little bit of getting used to this weird diode conduction characteristic, okay, all right, are there questions about this, are we good, okay ba tayo, thumbs up uli, mga sudyante, hello, if you understood it, if not, this is a good opportunity to ask questions before you get even more confused, all right, any questions, any questions, are we going, gone, okay, so let's go, all right, how, okay, how did we get 0.7, okay, how is p sub 0 equal to 0.7, you'll notice that V sub 0 here is connected across the diode, right, so V sub 0 is equal to Vb2, and this guy is also in parallel with it, and voltage, and components that are parallel with each other will have the same voltage, okay, okay, all right, so because it is all in parallel, all right, okay, so there you go, all right, other questions, okay, going, going, going, okay, let's go forward, or what about this one, series of circuits here that are not at all difficult out, figure out, E1 is 20 volts, E2 is 4 volts, now we've gone back to that stupid format where the voltage sources are not explicitly drawn, but I'll help you guys out, let's put what is stated here, this is 4 volts, this is 20 volts, okay, so you're asked to determine the current I, okay, so how do you do that, well, if you forget about the diodes, this is very obviously just a KVL, right, it always is anyway, right, okay, so the big question is what happens as we put in these two diodes, so you'll notice that these two diodes are in parallel with each other, and they are back to back, okay, all right, now, how do, or what happens when we have two diodes like this that are back to back, well, if the current is attempting to flow in this direction and on the assumption that there's enough voltage to put them into the forward biased region, then we're going to get a forward conduction of this particular diode with a voltage drop of 0.7 volts, because again, it's made out of silicon. What about the other diode? Well, if the current is attempting to flow in this direction as shown here, then it's only this guy that will be forward biased, and the second diode here, D2, will be reverse biased, okay? And so, this will basically act as an open circuit, whereas this guy will act as a, well, closed switch with a 0.7 volt drop, okay? So, in other words, it's as if this guy does not exist if the current is flowing in the left to right direction, okay? On the other hand, if the current is attempting to flow in the opposite direction, all right, in the opposite direction, it is this guy that will conduct naman, and again, the polarity will turn out this way, all right, you'll get a 0.7 volt drop, and this one is the guy that will be like a closed switch, except that it's dropping 0.7, whereas this guy, D1, will be reverse biased, and so, it will act as an open circuit. That, again, is on the assumption that the current's flowing from right to left, okay? So, again, just look at the direction of the current in relation to the arrow of the diode symbol, okay? All right, so, with that in mind, with that in mind, let's go back to this problem. So, I have a 20 volt source, and I have another voltage here, which is 4 volts, okay? So, I have a 20 volt and 4 volt source. The big question, of course, is what is the direction of flow? So, if current is going to be flowing from left to right, then it is this diode that will conduct. If current is flowing right to left, then this diode will conduct. So, either way, there's going to be at least one diode that is conducting, right? There's at least one diode that's conducting, and again, if you have this model 2 assumption, then it's just a fixed 0.7 volt drum, okay? Now, it's very obvious, given that the voltage on the left side is bigger than the voltage on the right side, it is obvious that current is going to be flowing in this particular direction, okay? left to right, following, you know, the standard engineering notion of current flow, right? So, given that, you can easily figure out, all right, hopefully, you can easily figure out the current that's going to be going through the resistor R, okay? so, we can say that I is equal to 20 volts minus 4 volts minus 0.7 volts, are you guys following, divided by 2.2 kilo ohms, okay? And so, that is your current flowing through the circuit, okay? Now, if you've got a little bit confused, because I put the voltages not necessarily in sequence, well, as we said, all right, this is plus minus and it is 0.7 volts. So, if you really insist on writing out the KBL equation, all right, it's negative 20, all right, plus V sub R plus 0.7, all right, plus 4 is equal to 0, all right? So, we did a loop like that, okay? So, this is your KBL equation, all right, KBL equation, and we can say that V sub R is equal to, okay, 20 minus 4 minus 0.7, which is exactly what I wrote, okay? That's what you're going to be left with, okay? And so, therefore, because of Ohm's law, we can say that I is equal to this thing on top, all right? Why bother writing that? This thing on top from here divided by its resistance, okay? So, there you go. Now, what does that turn out to be? Let's use my little calculator here. I pressed something. Oops. Okay, I don't know. I pressed something. Now, it's in a different mode, but let's see if it still works. So, 15.3 divided by 2,200 is equal to 6.95 milliampere. Okay? 6.95 milliampere. All right? There we go. Okay, Docs? Clear? All right? There's your answer. 6.95 milliampere. Unless my calculator's joking. There's a weird symbol that suddenly came out. I don't know what I pressed. Darn it! Okay, questions! May tanong? Okay mo tayo? Wala, di ba? Madali. So, easy. Easy peasy! All right? Let's go to the next one. Oh, this looks so much more complex. Or is it? Okay. Walang challenge pa rin. Madalang madali. Determine I1, I2, and I sub D. Nasaan yung I sub T? Okay. What the heck? I1, I2, I sub D. I2, Para madali ang buha. Okay, I sub D1 and I sub D. Ayan, sige, para sure tayo kasi it doesn't say which one it is. That's crazy, right? Okay, I sub D1 and I sub D2. And again, let's assume we have a model 2 type of diode. Okay, and let's try answering the question. Try some, a little bit of analysis. Is this difficult? Same thing, same, same. Anybody? Go try solving it and let's put your answers here on the chat. You can just message me if you like. All right. Give it a go. Oh, walang tutulog-tulog dyan, ha? Attempt. Use your brain and figure out. All right. What is the answer? Woohoo. This might be a little bit challenging, admittedly. Let me just try something else to make sure. Ah, yeah. It's obvious. It's obvious. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, okay. Yeah, that makes sense. And then. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, okay. All right. No problem. Ha! Makes sense. Okay. Ano? Nobody is giving answer. Hello. Yoohoo. Anybody want to try? Okay. So again, of course, let's form the KBL. KBL, KBL. And this one can potentially be a little bit tricky to answer, but in this case, it's not. All right. It really depends on how the values or the resistance values, et cetera, were chosen. In this case, we don't have any problem that the thing will turn out to be particularly tricky. Okay. So this one is pretty straightforward. It will follow the most basic. What's the proper term? It's not assumption. Attempt. Okay. It will follow your intuitive guess. All right. But so let's solve this and then I'll point out a possible complication that might happen. Okay. All right. So how do we solve this problem? Well, if you look at it very, very carefully, it's simply that we have one single important loop here, going from the voltage source, all right, going around like so, winding back at the beginning, except that we have a little bit of a complication because we have this branching of the current possibly into the R1. You'll notice that in this particular case, hopefully everybody can see that R1 is simply in parallel with B2. All right. And so it's just that it's been drawn in that place on top, but you could easily have drawn it over here. All right. And you can now see that it is just in parallel with our D2. Okay. All right. So how does that turn out or what will happen given this kind of a situation? Well, nothing really particularly significant because of the values that are involved, but let's just give it a go. All right. The basic KVL equation going from the starting point here is that it is basically negative 20 plus V sub D1. Okay. Okay. Plus V sub D2. All right. Plus V sub R2. And you will take note that V sub R1. All right. Is equal to V sub D2 because the two of them are in parallel. Okay. So you could have used either one of them. Again, the fundamental equation is going to be pretty much the same. Okay. And because you've gotten over to V sub R2 over here, you're back at your starting point and you can close that equation by, you know, setting that equal to zero. Okay. So there's your standard equation. And we know that because they are silicon diodes, then these two are simply equal to 0.7 volts. Okay. And that makes it really easy. Maybe several of you already jumped and figured out that the underlying equation, right, is very simply that it is, if you wanted to calculate, for example, the total current flowing here, right, you would say that I is equal to 20 minus 1.4 volts divided by 5,600 ohms. Okay. And this will turn out to be equal to, all right, 20 minus 1.4, that's 18.6 volts over 5.6 K. And that is equal to 3.32, all right, milliampere. Okay. That's equal to 3.32 milliampere, which doesn't really answer any of the problems quite yet, but, you know, we're getting there. All right. So I2, in fact, all right, if you look at this, I2 is equal to I because that's the same current that's flowing. So in fact, okay, there's already one answer, hooray. Okay. 3.32 milliampere for I2. Now, what is, I will answer I1. Well, we can already also answer I1. Okay. Because we know that this is equal to 0.7 volts, all right, 0.7 across this diode. Therefore, the voltage across this resistor will also be equal to 0.7 volts. All right. And so therefore, we can calculate I1, okay, which is equal to I1, R1, which is equal to 0.7 volts divided by 3.3 K. And the answer to that, right, would be 0.7 divided by 3, 3, 0, 0 is 2.12, oh, pangin. Okay. 212.12 microampere. Okay. So there's your I1. 212.12 microampere. Okay, docks. Got that? From the fact that the voltage drop across the 3.3 K resistor is 0.7. All right. Okay. Okay. Okay. And is there anything else that we actually need to solve here? If we want to get I sub D2, in that case, I sub D2 is equal to 3.32 milliamperes minus 212.12 microampere. Okay. And for whatever that turns out to be, it's a very small amount of current. Okay. Divided by 212.12, I extend to the minus 6. Daming pinipindot-pindot. Hey, mali pa yung sagot. Oops. I obviously pressed something wrong. 3.32 times 10 to the minus 3 minus 2.12.12 times 10 to the minus 6. gives us, okay, sorry, 3.107. Or whatever, 3.11 milliampere. It's really tiny. All right. It's quite small. And so that's your answer. Okay. I sub D2. Okay. Ano pa po lang? I sub D1. Meron na rin yan. Kasi nakalculate na rin natin. It's the same amount of current. So I sub D1 is equal to 3.32 milliampere because it's all just going around over there. Okay. And I think that basically answers all of the questions here. Okay. Na-gets ba rin yung? All right. Now, this problem, all right, you have to be careful with this one because you'll notice that we have the KVL equation here where we've assumed that the diode drop for this one is equal to 0.7 volts. Okay. So everything else is sort of pretty straightforward. But this one, you have to be very careful with because dependent on the resistor value, okay, there is a possibility that we may not get to 0.7 volts. Okay. Baka hindi umabot sa 0.7 on the basis that we have a certain amount of current flowing here which will branch out between these two. Okay. So some of that is going to go through the diode but there is also some current that will flow and go through this particular resistor. Now, we calculated, all right, that if it reaches 0.7, then the amount of current flowing I1 is going to be very, very small. It's going to be only 212 micro amperes. And as such, all right, it does not affect anything, all right, in the calculation. But let's have a quick look and let's change the problem so that you can understand this. And let's make this resistor value here. Instead of it being 3.3k, let's change it. I'm going to make this equal to 100 ohms. Let me just check. Okay. Points. Okay. Ayan. Okay. So, ito magkakaroon na ng, ano, magkakaroon na ng malaking efekto. All right. Let's say that the original problem, all right, had R1 equal to 100 ohms and, you know, that's what was given. Then you're asked to calculate. Make the same calculations. All right. And so this one is going to be a little bit more difficult to do. Right. Now, why is it going to be more difficult? Well, okay. Quick inspection. We already know that if we indeed have 0.7 across here and 0.7 across P2, then we would have calculated that the total current I sub 2, we already had that value a while ago. I shouldn't have erased it. Okay. Ano nga ba yung sagot natin dito kanina? Ilan milliampere dito? 3.32 milliampere. Thank you. All right. It's 3.32 milliampere only for everything, for all the current flowing. Now, look at it. If we follow through with this assumption that there's 0.7 volts across here, then the voltage across the 100 ohm resistor is also 0.7 volts. You following? All right. Because they're in parallel. So 0.7. 0.7 across this guy, 0.7 then across R1. Now, have a look. What is I1 now? 0.7 divided by 100 ohms is equal to 7 milliampere. So you'll notice that the current that will flow through this resistor is greater than the amount of current flowing through this circuit in theory. So, obviously, something is wrong. It cannot be possible that the current flowing outward, 3.32 milliampere, paano magiging 0.7 milliampere yung nandito, mas malaki pa ang lumabas kesa dun sa pumasok. Okay? So, alam natin that there is something wrong. we have made an incorrect assumption. Okay? So, you need to be very, very careful about this. So, given that we have a simple and easy to calculate and visualize kind of situation, given that it's a model 2, the correct way of actually approaching this problem is to determine there are two possible cases. Okay? Okay? There are two possible cases for this particular circuit. And it's dependent on the resistor value R of, the resistive value of R1. If it is a high enough resistance, all right, the amount of current flowing through here, all right, I1, will be within the amount of current going in, all right? And so, if you do that, you can assume that the diode will hold it down to 0.7. On the other hand, all right, if the resistor value here is lower, then it's not going to reach 0.7. Kasi ang source mo, 3.32 milliampers lang at most. Okay? So, what's going to happen here is that all the current will flow through here, okay, 3.32 milliampers, and ito hindi aabot ng 0.7. In fact, hindi ito magiging 3.32 milliampers. It's going to be a little bit less than that. So, there are two possibilities. What you need to do is you need to solve, all right, two separate situations. So, the first equation assumes that the amount of current flowing through I1 is going to be less than the source current going in, and thus, the 0.7 volts is true. So, that's your first equation. So, case one, all right, is what we solved kanina, and it will take on the form of the assumption where we have minus 20 plus 0.7 plus 0.7 plus V sub R2 is equal to 0, all right, and you'll be able to solve V sub R2 is equal to 18.6 volts, and then you'll be able to solve that I, the current flowing I, is equal to 18.6 volts divided by 5.6 K. So, this is your case one, which is what we did a while ago. Okay? This equation would hold true if the value of R1 is fairly big, which means that I1 is going to be a small value that is less than the current that you're going to be able to calculate here. On the other hand, for case two, where it is going to be that there's a large amount of current flowing through here, it will get all of the current in B ito aabot, all right, doon sa 0.7 ng diode 2, so case two will be that the equation is going to look like this, minus 20 plus the first one, which is still 0.7 volts, okay, plus V sub R1 instead, because we don't know if it will get all the way to 0.7, all right, plus V sub R2 is equal to 0, okay, all right, then you of course substitute, all right, given that case, the current flow is going to be like this, all right, based on that equation, all right, so we're going to have an I flowing going around like that, so you're going to get minus 20 plus 0.7 plus I times whatever resistance, R1, plus I times R2 is equal to 0, okay, so again, it's still your basic KBL, you have your constant resistance values, because it would have been given in the problem, so in this case, you would have substituted 5600, and R2 here is 100 ohms, so we're going to put that in, and you're going to be able to calculate that this is equal to 19.3 volts divided by 5700 ohms, and that gives you a particular answer, okay, all right, then you go back and say that given the answer here, all right, 19.3 divided by 5700, that gives you 3.386, all right, 3.386 milliampere, all right, that's the amount of current that's going to be flowing, it's a little bit higher than before, all right, kasi isang 0.7 lang ang binaban yan, so 3.386 milliampere, you're now going to be able to calculate V sub R2 is going to be equal to 3.386 milliampere multiplied to 100 ohms, and that gives us a voltage of 0.338, sorry, yeah, 386 volts, okay, too many decimal places na, all right, so yan ang lalabas, now, anong conclusion natin dito, so given this voltage, all right, the voltage across VD2 is equal to the voltage on Vr2 because they are in parallel, and you'll find that VB2 is equal to 0.3386 volts because they're in parallel, okay, so, hindi umabot sa 0.7, bakit? Kasi lahat ng current dumaan dito sa ating 100 ohms, and the voltage that results from that 100 ohms is only 0.34 volts. It's less than the conduction voltage of the second diode. So, looking at the curve of the second diode, if it's at 0.7, the voltage that was developed was only about approximately half of that 0.34. So, hindi siya abot sa conduction voltage ng diode. So, in fact, this diode is going to act like an open circuit because all of the voltage is across the resistor alone. Alright? So, I hope you follow that. So, this is an important distinction. Alright? This is a very, very possibly a tricky problem. So, you need to calculate case 1 and case 2 here and find out which of the two are the correct result. Okay? And the correctness or which one is the correct case is dependent on how much voltage will develop across the resistor that is in parallel with diode number 2. Okay? So, if you start for example with case 2 and then you calculate it and then you find out that the resulting answer is all right? Pag calculate mo ng current whatever that turns out to be minultiply mo ng resistor value ng R1 you'll get sorry R ay mali bakit 2 2 2 V R1 Duh Okay? When you calculate it and you find out that ah ang lumabas sakin dito sa particular value it's not 100 ohms it's a different thing lumabas dito for example 1 volt okay? Let's just say that based on that assumption all right? You tried case 2 and you calculated and it turns out that umabot siya ng 1 volt ah! Okay now you know if the voltage is potentially high enough to turn diode D2 on it will forward conduct okay? It will forward conduct because this is greater than right? This is greater than 0.7 volts so if it gets to greater than 0.7 the diode will conduct and so therefore once the diode starts conducting it will limit it to 0.7 volts okay? It will limit it to 0.7 volts in that case you know that you should have used the case 1 equation okay? So it will be that instead of VR1 we will know that the voltage is limited to only 0.7 volts and then you calculate it based on that okay? All right? So that's what you need to do with something that looks like this okay? And this is also why when I asked you to try to look at it I was doing my own calculations first making sure that the values that were shown essentially will hold for the 0.7 volt assumption all right? So that's a little bit complex a little bit tricky are there questions? Were you able to follow this particular you know complexity for this problem? Questions? Get it? Yeah? All right? Okay? Tignan nang mabuti yung problem ha? All right? Mga ganto medyo possibly confusing all right? Ayan tignan mo that's why it went into all of that so never mind. So that was the most complex example that we have here okay? So let's go to diode circuits okay? Diode circuits tama na yan all right? What are diodes useful for? Why the heck are we studying it? Okay? So here are a couple of general use cases all right? Where are diodes mostly used? okay? So the first what is oh it's not appearing appear appear okay? The first large use case of diodes is for the purpose of rectification okay? A diode is used as a rectifier meron pang pronunciation dito all right? dates back to 1611 all right? A rectifier is a device that rectifies okay? Now what the hell does rectify mean? All right? In normal English rectify is to make correct but you know that's normal English you rectify a situation you fix a problem you make things correct if there's something wrong you ask somebody to rectify the situation ayusin mo ang problema all right? but that's normal English in electronics and electrical systems rectify means to change an alternating current current that is alternating and make it into a non changing current direction a direct current in other words okay? So you go from alternating to non alternating which is basically called a direct current now this can potentially be confusing because your notion of a direct current at this point is to have something that is a non changing static current a non changing static current which is what we call a DC current a steady state current okay? So maybe the better thing here is to assume okay given that you have an AC current alternating means that the polarity all right of the current alternates okay? It changes from positive to negative all right? And if you rectify the current you are doing something so that the current becomes unipolar ! Okay? Unipolar meaning of a single polarity all right? By using that particular term there is an important distinction. DC implies that it is unipolar it's of single polarity but it is steady. That's the problem okay? Non-changing but this all right alternating current if we were to rectify it, it would change into a unipolar signal, a signal of single polarity and it might, for example, look like this. Right? This is the result of the rectification process. you go from an alternating polarity to one of a single polarity. So that's your rectification or if you choose right, you can also get a waveform for example that looks like this. Here, the resulting output current again is still unipolar. one polarity unified kasi. All right? One polarity, this one is positive and this one would be a negative current. So technically speaking, all right, this is really what direct current implies. direct current implies unipolarity and what is wrong at this point is that our notion from CNETRON1 is that a steady state current, all right, which we defined as DC current, needs to be steady, but that's not actually correct. Okay? So take a battery voltage, over time the current will go down because the battery will weaken. Okay? So it's not really steady if you look at it over the long term. Okay? And yet we call it DC because DC means single polarity, period. Sa toto a lot. All right? So DC means single polarity. It does not mean that the thing has to be steady. All right? Okay? I hope that's clear. So when we say direct current starting at this point, all right, think of it simply as a unipolar polarity current or voltage for that matter. Okay? All right? Not necessarily a steady value. It can be changing. All right? As long as it doesn't change polarity. Okay? All right. So let's look at diode usage. So it can be used for rectification purposes. If you do that, then it's called a rectifier. Okay? And so let's look at a simple use. All right? How do you use or how do you place a diode and let it become a half wave rectifier? Actually, I'm dito. But what the hell? All right? And we'll also see that with a little bit of change in the circuit, we can also make the diodes work as a full wave rectifier. So what the hell is a half wave rectifier? And what the hell is a full wave rectifier? All right? And aside from those, we also have what we call the bridge rectifier, which in fact produces a full wave signal at its output as well. So let's look at those circuits. Okay? All right. So here is a not yet circuit that will show you what's supposed to happen, but let's see here. So here's a diode with a voltage source, V1, and it is placed here, and we have a resistor that, well, acts as a load resistor, something that completes the circuit, and then we will monitor what kind of signal appears across our resistor. Okay? Represented here by V sub O, or V sub zero. Okay? So, oh, yeah, all right. So, V1, right? Assuming that V1 has this kind of a signal on it, although it is not correct to show this, we should actually have a symbol that looks like this. Ayan. Okay? So, V1, in this case, is an alternating current voltage source. Okay? V1 is an alternating current voltage source. So, the output signal from V1 looks like this, and that is what is feeding our diode-resistor combination. Okay? Now, this point where it can get a little bit challenging in the beginning. All right? What will happen? Okay? What will happen? So, we take the analysis by basically looking at the signal one portion at a time and determining if our diode is going to be conducting or non-conducting. In other words, we have to find out if our diode is going to be forward or reverse biased based on the dynamic waveform that is presented to the diode. Okay? All right. So, there's something incomplete here with the animation. If there's any animation that's happening, the software application here goes nuts. but if we take this portion of the waveform from here to here, which I'm going to box, all right? So, you'll notice that the voltage polarity is positive in comparison to this one. So, we'll just put a plus symbol here to show that the voltage polarity is positive. so, we're going to get a voltage being applied or being produced by the voltage source that looks like this. And so, therefore, the current will attempt to flow in the clockwise direction. Okay? And you'll notice that if the current is flowing in the clockwise direction, it is indeed following the arrow of the diode. And so, the diode will basically be forward biased. And when it's forward biased, it basically acts as a closed switch. You'll notice that the diode voltage here, all right? V sub D equal to zero is on the assumption that you have a model one, which is an ideal diode. And for now, I guess, to make life easy, we can assume that. All right? So, model one, ideal diode. Right? And so, what is the diode conduction characteristic for the ideal? All right? And so, just so that that is very clear in your brain so that you don't make any mistakes, right? The diode conduction characteristic for the ideal diode looks like this. Okay? So, ayan, pula. Okay? In an ideal diode, it just conducts. As long as the direction of the current is correct, it will conduct, and it will conduct perfectly. Walang 0.7 volt drop. Okay? So, given that, okay, what will happen? Well, what happens is it's as if the voltage source is directly connected to our resistor. So, therefore, the voltage that will be produced across the resistor, V sub O, will simply be equal to V sub 1. Alright? What happened? What happened? What happened? What happened? What happened? Alright? So V sub O will equal to V sub 1. The input voltage, given that it is just a straight connection, will be reproduced across the resistor. So if we were to draw out the voltage across our resistor, V sub R, we are going to get exactly the same thing. Sorry, it's a very poor drawing. This is the voltage across our V sub R. It's just that it's connected, very straight forward. So I hope there's no problem with that. Alright? And so when we get on the other hand to this portion of the graph, where the voltage polarity is negative. Okay? So, ganyan ang lalabas. There's an attempt now for the current to flow in the opposite direction. And because there's now the direction being opposite, alright, of the diode symbol, the diode acts as an open circuit. It is reverse biased. And given that it's an open circuit, obviously, our voltage source is no longer connected to our resistor. Therefore, the voltage across the resistor becomes zero. So for this second part, the output voltage V sub O is zero. And of course, that is the point here. Alright? We get to this point. And then the cycle again happens. And so we're back to this first situation. So if we were to draw out the complete waveform, combining this, we see that the output is going to look like this. And for the second portion, it will come up and go down again, exactly just like before. Okay? And so on and so forth. So this simple diode circuit will produce a voltage across or current across our resistor that basically looks like this. Okay? And there is your rectifier action, rectification action. Okay? Okay? And so you get now a single polarity voltage across our resistor. Okay? Except that, alright, that single polarity current or voltage is dropping out, alright, every now and then. So ito yung malalabas, okay? So ayan, ito drawing natin, sundan natin to, ayan ang magiging voltage across our resistor. Okay? Alright? That's the voltage that will happen. And because it's missing that negative portion, alright, this is what we call as half wave, alright, rectification. Half wave. Half wave. Half wave. Kalahate lang ang nirectify. In other words, alright? Kalahati lang ang narectify. So what's the use of rectifying an alternating current? Well, exactly that. It allows you to produce a unipolar, aka DC current from an AC source. Okay? Okay? So your Meralco power is alternating. Many of your gadgets and appliances actually operate on DC, alright? Many of your appliances actually operate on DC. Last term you were working with your LED lights. Ang bahay, di ba? The LED lights actually operate on DC. So the question would be, if many of the appliances that we have actually operate on DC, how do we use electricity that is AC, alright, on appliances that are actually DC? The answer is, inside the appliance there is a rectifier. So that internally, the AC electricity from Meralco is converted into DC. So that the internal components or whatever in that appliance can work with that electricity. So internally, there is rectification that takes place, alright? At the heart, at the very beginning, not the heart, at the very, very beginning of that appliance, if it actually internally operates on DC, you will find, alright, diodes doing their job of taking the alternating current and converting it into a DC. And then, in fact, the rest of the appliance can operate on it. Okay, docks? And so, the case of the LED lights, for example, that you have in your house, they are definitely units or devices. LED lights are devices that operate on DC. LED lights are devices that operate on DC. So if you open up the LED light and look at the circuit inside, you will actually find that part of that circuit is a rectifier. Alright? And actually, as a technicality, the LEDs themselves are already diodes in the first place. So they really only produce a light if you provide them with the correct polarity. Because if not, reverse means that the LED itself will not even conduct. Okay? Alright. So that's a very important use for the diode. Okay? Okay? And what has been illustrated here is what we call as half-wave rectification. In this particular case, given the direction of the diode, we would see that the resulting waveform across our resistor is a positive-only signal. Okay? It's a unipolar signal that is all positive. Positive. Positive lang. Wala siyang negative portion. Okay? Alright? Kung binaliktad natin yung diode, alright, if we had put in the diode the other way, then you would get an output signal feeding the resistor that basically looked like this naman. It would only allow the negative portion to get through and it would remove the positive part of the waveform. So this is still half-wave rectification. Okay? Are you guys following? Are we okay? Okay? Okay. Diane, hopefully you got your answer. Okay? Alright. Sige. Let's go forward. Alright. Alright. So half-wave rectifier. So if from the real, from the ideal diode, okay? From the ideal diode, if we now go to a more realistic model, okay, for our diode, if we were using a model 3, for example, the model 3, model 3 conduction characteristic would look like this. Okay? Okay? And if you use the model 3, okay, which is more realistic, your rectified output, the voltage being supplied to the resistor. By the way, the resistor here is just a substitute possibly for anything that you're trying to power up that requires a DC current or voltage. Okay? So here you'll notice again that it's emphasized it's a load emulated by the resistor. But either way, if you have a diode there with a more realistic conduction curve like a model 3, the input signal would look like this. Alright? And then the output of the diode would have a more realistic characteristic. Alright? So here it's being said that this is actual. Alright? Where it looks something like this. So it does not start conducting until the input reaches 0.7 volts. Okay? It doesn't start conducting. And the greater current, if we pull in a greater amount of current, alright, then the voltage drop across the diode becomes slightly larger than 0.7. And so we can see that at the very, very peak, the voltage drop of the diode might be something in the notion of maybe closer to 1 volt, where it actually begins at about, oh, even 0.5, for example. If it's just a low, 0.5. If it's a peak amount of current, maybe it's dropping closer to 1 volt. Okay? So in an ideal diode, it perfectly conducts without any losses. In a real diode, there's going to be a little bit of voltage drop, which actually varies with the amount of current that the diode is providing. Okay? So here it says 0.7, but it could be greater than that. Remember that it is not a straight line upward, stilted. Alright? So it could be greater than 0.7. Okay? But more or less, you expect to get this voltage drop, and this is going to be highly visible. It could be a significantly visible voltage drop, dependent on the magnitude of the input voltage. So isipin ninyo kung 1 volt peak to peak o kung 1 volt peak lang yan, e kung 0.7 yung binaba niya, e di yung lalabas dito, ganito lang kalaki. Alright? Alright? So it will look like a very, very terrible looking rectification process. Why? Because the input voltage is only 1 volt peak. Alright? Kung 1 volt peak lang yan, 0.7 yung tinanggal ng diode. At halos wala nang natira. 0.3 volts na lang yung natira sa output. Gets nyo? Alright? So if you have a very, very, very big waveform. Alright? If this were 10 volts, for example, kung 10 volts yan, e di yung 0.7 would be much, much less significant. Okay? There's your 0.7 volts. So it would look like a much, much, well, because it is, it's a much smaller fraction of the input waveform. Okay? So this is, the way it looks is going to be very dependent on how big the input waveform is. Okay? So please keep that in mind. Why am I telling you all of this? Well, although you won't experience it quite yet, alright, in experiment two, we're going to be looking at, you know, circuits such as this. The rectification action as well as clipping and clamping action of diodes. So that's going to be coming up in experiment number two. Okay? So this is half wave rectification. Are there questions about it? Okay? 8.50 still, 8.53. We have a few more minutes. Kaya pa natin tapusin ito. Alright? Ah, ito na nga. Okay. So more examples of half wave rectification. Yeah, this just does exactly the same thing. We've already discussed this. Alright? So for half the cycle, it's conducting. Therefore, you're going to get an output B sub O. Sorry for how fuzzy it looks. Alright? For the second half of the input cycle, it is non-conducting. It acts like an open circuit. And so therefore, the output is zero. Okay? Alright. So yes, we know this. So this is half wave rectification. A few comments just to close this thing off. Alright? For half wave rectified signal, the effective DC voltage is 0.318 V sub O. V sub M. What the hell is that? Okay? So if you've forgotten from Citron 1. Okay? Alright? That V sub M that it is talking about is this one. This is V sub M. In the equation, V is equal to V sub M sine. Alright? Theta. Alright? So V sub M. Alright? And the effective DC voltage for a half wave rectified signal is approximately 0.318 V sub M. Okay? So saan lang galing yung 0.318 na yan? Alright? Alright? Alright? Alright? Alright? Alright? Alright? Why is it 0.318? Approximate lang naman. Where did that come from? The answer basically is that's approximately half of the RMS voltage. Remember your V RMS? So, yung V RMS, saan galing yung V RMS? The V RMS is basically this one. It's the effective voltage that you get. It's the effective DC voltage that you get from your alternating current. Okay? So, if we take out half of it because it's not getting through our diode, then the effective voltage becomes half of that V RMS voltage, which is pretty close to this one. Okay? So, that's where that's coming from. Okay? And if you bother to consider the diode drop V sub D, then it becomes V M minus V D because it will remove that little bit over there. And that's going to be your new peak voltage. Okay? The peak voltage will be a little bit smaller because of the diode forward conduction. So, you just factor that in and then you multiply by 0.31. Okay? All right. So, that's it. Okay. So, unfortunately, we're out of time. But just very briefly. All right? Just very briefly. Para lang alam ninyo. Okay? With a little bit of rearrangement. All right? If we had two voltage sources that we could put together, both producing an alternating current, we could put the two diodes together like this, and one of them will conduct through one cycle, and the other one will conduct at the negative cycle of the other one. And the other one will now produce a positive output here. And the result, essentially, is that we get this kind of an output waveform going into our load resistor. Okay? And you'll notice that this is now a waveform which produces all of the humps, if you like. All right? And so, this is what we call as a full wave rectifier. Okay? Now, we're going to analyze this. All right? How is it possible that we are getting this full wave? What exactly is happening? You can't necessarily visualize that at this point. So, that's what we're going to start off with on Thursday. Okay? All right. Now, just as an FYI, just to remind you, if you are in the first lab section, then we are going to be face-to-face on Thursday. Because it would mean that despite the fact that our lecture... Yeah. You might have a question, is the lecture going to be face-to-face or online? Well, the answer is that it's still going to be online. Because we have a mixed set of students, no? There are two sections for lecture. And then there are three lab sections. So, that single lab section will be seeing each other face-to-face on Thursday. Okay? But we can have students like you, all right? Who are in the first lab section. And some of you are in the second lab. And some of you are in the third lab. So, magulo. All right? So, our lecture is still going to be online on Thursday. And only students in the first lab section will be expected at 11 o'clock in G407. Okay, dooks. So, that's it for now. Are there questions? It's 9 o'clock. Naroon bang tanong? Questions? Questions? Don't be shy. Ask. Or forever hold your peace. Wala. Sige. So, walang tanong. All right. Very good. Thank you very much. And I'll see you next time. Goodbye.
