able to actually see you guys. All right. So the participants list, as well as the chat, is going to be buried basically under the presentation because there's only one screen to work with. So what's going to happen essentially here is very likely, if you have any questions, the only way to call my attention to it will be to unmute. So kindly do that if you have any questions as we go along with today's lecture. So this is temporary. This is only once in a rare while. So given the situation where our classes happen to be online, when in fact under regular circumstances, we would have been face-to-face. So what's this? I could have opted to use the normal system, but that would mean that I would be at home. And I can't really ensure that I can run from the house to DLSU to have the lab class at 11 o'clock in the span of time there without running into horrendous amounts of traffic, which are really not viable. So better come to school early and then work with this computer system. Actually, the only other thing it would need is another monitor, but it's not worth the extra desk space if it's only used rarely, right? Okay. So anyway, let's go ahead with today's lesson. We stopped, I believe, here at the full wave rectifier. So let me just put this up on screen. As soon as I figure out how to do it. Oops. No, not Vlad. Oh, my. Hang on. I lost the page. It was already set up. Oh, here. Okay. Slide show from the current slide. Darn it. Okay. And let me just switch over to the Zoom session to try to capture it. Share. Presenting here. Okay. All right. So as you can see, I'll have to minimize certain things because they are partially covering the screen. And it just doesn't work. Okay. I can get this partially out of the way. Maybe this will work. Hang on. Okay. Sige. Buti na lang hindi widescreen yung slides, no? Okay. As for the chat, unfortunately, there's no way to do it because this is already shrunk to the smallest possible. So I'll have to just get it out of the way like so. Okay. All right. This is doable, except maybe for this portion over here towards the top where you can see that something's covering it. Okay. Okay. Sige. So we'll try to work with this. If you have any questions, it's still better for you to unmute, although I do have the ability to see if you have raised an emoticon somewhere. Okay. And let me know if there are issues with what you're hearing or seeing so that I might try to correct it. Okay. So this is where we left off last meeting. Let me just turn the pen on here. Or wala rin yung ano. Ganon dit. Pen widths. Okay. Sige. So I think this will work, although it feels a little bit on the slow side for some reason. Okay. We stopped your last meeting. And this is a full wave rectifier configuration, as you can see stated here. Now, the big question, of course, is how is it possible that we are going to be getting a full wave? In the previous slides, we saw a single diode produces a half wave. Just for convenience, here it is. Okay. So a single diode will clip off one of the portions, all right, either the positive portion or the negative portion of the waveform. So how do we manage to get a full wave using this other configuration here? Well, the trick, essentially, is that there are two voltage sources. Okay. That are essentially in phase with each other. So as shown in the symbol here, and let me just emphasize this, this is one sinusoidal wave over here, and this other source is also producing a similar sinusoidal wave. And the thing that we have to take note of is that they are synchronized with each other. They are in phase with each other. When the upper voltage source is producing a positive peak, the other source is doing exactly the same thing, and they also go negative at exactly the same time. They are at exactly the same frequency as well. All right? Okay. So given this, the top one is actually pretty easy to analyze. As we go to the positive portion, both of them are doing so. As we go through the positive portion, we get a current flowing in this particular direction, and so therefore, this will bias our ideal diode into a forward conduction. Okay? So we can see that this one is in forward conduction for this phase of the waveform. And given that it is forward conducting, essentially, you'll notice, by the way, that this one here is connected to ground, and so is this. So this forms a circuit for us from ground through the diode, through our RL, back to ground. So that's one loop over there. The second voltage source and the other diode is basically, given that it is positive, it is in a positive phase, all right? The biasing here is that this is going to be negative, all right? And this is going to, all right, this is going to be negative and this is going to be positive. And so therefore, this is reverse bias. Okay? Reverse bias, and so therefore, it acts like an open circuit. So there's no contribution from this second supply here, as well as the second diode. So voila, for this part of the waveform, there is no contribution, all right? There's no contribution from this second one. So anyway, for the one on top, it is producing a forward bias. So the power from this guy is reaching our RL. And if we look at the voltage on our RL, which is labeled VL here, all right, we get this output waveform. Okay? We get this output waveform from this input portion. Okay? So that is pretty straightforward. That is basically exactly like this one here. We get exactly the same thing, all right? And we see that there's an output there, which is the positive half cycle. Okay? Now, what happens later? All right? So let me just erase everything because this is a mess now. All right? So, for the second half of the cycle, for the negative going half of the cycle over here, okay, the voltage now becomes negative. And so, therefore, we are going to get this polarity here, if you notice. All right? And so this one is going to be reverse bias. Okay? And so, therefore, this part is not going to produce any output. This is where you'd normally get just zero at the output, right? This is where it'll be zero at the output. But for this guy, you'll notice that this negative characteristic here, all right, given this, all right, will now be producing a polarity that looks like this on the diode. Okay? And so, what happens now is that this thing actually conducts, all right, this thing actually conducts in a reverse way, all right, it actually conducts in a reverse way and given that it is a negative, this conduction in a reverse way goes this way and winds up powering the resistor with a positive polarity. Okay? And so, given this, all right, we are going to get this second, all right, portion here from this particular circuit. All right? Okay? And that's it, essentially. So, we've traced out, right? So, if you like, if you want to look at the waveform contribution from this guy, first portion, it didn't produce anything, all right? For the second portion, it produced this negative thing, but that negative came from the reverse direction, if you like, and so, therefore, that negativeness going into ground produces a positive voltage on our resistor. So, we now get an output, essentially, that looks like this from our... lost the audio there. From our full cycle, right, single cycle, now produces these two pulses at the output. So, if we were to draw this in a proper phase relationship, it would... the input would look like this, and we get these two pulses coming out, and then, as we go through our second, all right, second portion, we are expecting to get this kind of an output from our rectifier system. Okay? So, this, essentially, is how this kind of a circuit works. It's not the most intuitive thing, admittedly, but, pretty much, you can see that we have what we call as full wave rectification. So, there are no missing pulses here, which means that, you know, maybe this is a little bit better, because it never falls, you never get a huge portion where the signal disappears for a significant amount of time. All right? And so, that's the full wave rectifier achieved through the use of a second voltage source, if you like. All right? Second voltage source and its own diode. All right? And so, that's essentially how it works. Okay, hang on. Let me just try to retrieve the chat here and the participants list. Here we go. Okay. So, I know that the chat is partially covering everything, but this is the point where I should be asking if there are any questions. Do you guys understand how the thing works? Okay? Okay? Okay? Yeah? All right? So, let's move forward given that most people are actively saying that they understood it. By the way, so, as an additional thing, all right? Oh, before we go there, as an additional thing, you might be wondering how are we going to get a synchronized pair of output signals that will power our two diodes so that we get a full wave output. That doesn't seem to make much sense. So, the answer is, you might recall towards the latter part of CETRON1, we discussed transformers. Okay? Transformers was the topic right before we started discussing diodes, right? And so, there is a transformer secondary configuration. Okay? Remember that a transformer is composed of a primary and a secondary winding. Now, if you create a secondary winding, basically, that looks like this, where the secondary coil has a connection right at the center of the coil, splitting the coil halfway. Right? Then, this is exactly what you're going to get. The output on this one, all right, we can connect to ground, and the output on this one will be a sinusoidal wave, and the output on this one will also be a sinusoidal wave, and they are going to be synchronized with each other, because they're coming from the same winding, actually. Okay? So, this, essentially, is the real-world manifestation of these twin voltage sources, all right? So, it is an everyday thing in terms of a transformer, all right, to have a winding, a secondary winding, that has what is called as a center tap. Okay, I can't read it. All right, so this is what we call a center tap, and that is what we normally would put to ground to create these two synchronized sinusoidal signals that can be used to be connected to two diodes. Okay, so this is a very, very real circuit. It's used everywhere, all right, and it is one of the ways by which we can achieve a full wave output from a rectifier. So it does require a pair of voltage sources that are synchronized with each other so that we can come up with this kind of an output using two diodes. Okay, all right, so, and this is, again, a very, very practical circuit. It is something that you would find is used in many different applications, okay, if the application requires a full wave signal, which is the more normal thing. All right, so having said that, let's go forward to a different approach, all right? There are three different rectification circuits available. So one is a half wave, all right? This one that we just took up was a full wave. Now, another way of implementing full wave rectification without the use of two voltage sources is to use what we call as a diode bridge configuration. So notice here that there is only one voltage source, okay? But we configure four diodes in this particular way, configure four diodes in this particular way, and we are going to be able to achieve an output that is full wave. All right? We're going to be able to achieve an output that is full wave from an input, a single input. All right? So the big question, of course, is how is that actually possible? I've not drawn it quite synchronized correctly with the output, but anyway, okay, so let's have a quick look and try to understand how these four diodes work together. All right? Well, they actually work in pairs to produce a full wave signal from a single source. So we'll break this down, okay, with the usual analysis. So here's our input, all right? Here's our voltage source. There's probably supposed to be a drawing here somewhere. Let me just check if... No, it doesn't have one. Okay, so I think these are just supposed to have been examples that we are quickly just showing that these are real world ones, but we might as well show you how it works, right? Okay, so for our full wave diode bridge configuration, okay, let's analyze what happens during the positive portion of the power output cycle. So for this positive portion, the polarity is going to look like this, okay? The polarity from the voltage source, okay, is going to look, like this, where the positive and negative from the source are fed into this bridge configuration. So magkakaroon po tayo ng positive dito, and from here, this is the same node, this is where the negative is. It goes that way, all right? And let's try to trace out where the current will flow. So here's the current I, that will hopefully flow, and we'll see if it's going to get blocked or not. Okay? So as the current goes through here, all right, as it goes and arrives here, there's a big question of, okay, where can the current go? Now notice that if it tries to go in this direction, okay, this will bias this particular diode in this polarity, which is reverse bias, okay, which reverse bias is this one, which means that this is going to be an open circuit. So wala, yan, it will not conduct. Okay? On the other hand, if you look at the other possibility where it goes this way, you'll notice that the arrow, the current direction, is going to be in the same direction as our diode A, where the diode A is pointing, which means that this diode will conduct. Okay? So this one means that diode A is forward biased. And you'll notice that here, when it arrives at this point, this current that the diode allowed to get through can either go this way or in the opposite direction, which is this way. But if it attempts to go downward, you'll notice that that will basically reverse bias diode D. All right? So this means that this diode will also be open circuit. Okay? So for this positive cycle, this positive cycle, C and D diodes are open circuit. So far, we've seen that A will now allow the current to propagate through and arrive at RL, which produces a positive pulse like so. Go through RL and via ground arrive back. All right? Via ground arrive over here. And you'll notice that this will bias this diode B in the correct direction. diode B will be forward biased and it will allow the current to get through in the correct direction and wind up back at the source. All right? So that is basically the path. All right? That's basically the path. You've seen that there is a complete path from the voltage source over to our load resistor through the conduction of diode A and B because they happen to be facing the correct direction. And let me just erase this mess. All right? Because this is essentially what this blue all right set of what's this? what you call drawings with arrows all right? Line arrows all right are pointing out. All right? So for the positive we wind up going through here through here through here through ground and then from here to here back to the source. Okay? So that's the direction that the thing is flowing and you'll notice again as I said A and B are forward biased and then C and B are reverse biased which means that they are open circuit. Okay? All right. So that's for the positive portion of the cycle. Hopefully everybody is following so far so let's have a look. Do we get a thumbs up please? Okay ba tayo? May tanong ba? Okay? All right? Sige. So we're okay. Now let's look at what happens during the negative cycle. Okay? So for the negative portion of the cycle all right? We are here negative we are going to get a polarity that looks like this. Okay? That's the polarity. It's the same magnitude but the direction is now reversed. So let's try to see what happens. So current is going to try to flow in this particular direction and we can trace out this current flow as it goes to here. Okay? And so what do you see? Now remember that this is now the positive, right? So current is flowing in this direction and again we're going to wind up with this situation. Can it go in this direction? And if it goes towards the left here, you will notice that this is in reverse of the arrow of B. So this guy is going to be reverse biased and as such that it will be an open circuit. So therefore current can only flow in the opposite way which is towards diode D this time you'll notice that diode D was reversed biased in the positive cycle. Now it is forward biased and as the current passes through diode D it is going to wind up again at this point where it can either go towards the load or go towards diode A. But again if you notice it is reversed in terms of trying to go through diode A. so diode A is going to be reversed biased and so therefore it will be open circuit. So really the current only winds up going in this way and you'll notice that it has wound up and has powered up our resistor positively again. It's the correct direction. It's winding up and providing a positive voltage to our diode where the current goes through winds up at ground. As it winds up at ground it goes through the ground and winds up back here at this particular node. Now remember B is reverse bias. B is reverse bias already. We've established that and we can see that there's only one direction that it can actually go which is C and that's the correct direction for C. So this one will be forward biased and it will wind up going through here. back to the source which again completes the circuit. So that's essentially how the thing works. So in the negative portion of our power waveform, power source from the power source output, A and B are reverse biased whereas C and B are the pair that is forward biased. now we can see that the output for that lower for this negative portion produces still a positive output onto our V sub L. So our analysis essentially shows that for every cycle of input, for every cycle of input, every complete cycle of input, we receive two positive pulses for our V sub L. And again, this is obviously full wave rectification. So when we go to the next cycle, we will obviously get another two pulses like so, and we will just continue this again and again and again. Okay? So where do we get a single voltage, sinusoidal voltage source? Well, if you're using a transformer, it's again the same thing, but you'll recognize that the transformer here might have a single winding for its secondary. In other words, the transformer has only two terminals for its secondary. secondary. All right? And so if you see a transformer with just a single winding or a single pair of outputs, then in all probability it is meant to operate with a four diode rectifier configuration. So this four diode rectifier configuration is called a bridge. All right? Sometimes it is called a full wave bridge. rectifier. Which can possibly be redundant. Okay? Kaya nga tinawag kasi na bridge. Pag sinabing bridge rectifier, automatic full wave na yun. So this one is sort of a redundant way of naming it. But, you know, it can turn up in certain literatures as well as terminologies that are used by people who are in electronics. Okay? So either way, just accept it. It might sound redundant to you, but that's fine. So this is a bridge rectifier configuration. So keep this in mind and it should be okay. All right? So are there any questions with this negative part of the cycle? Did you understand it? And in that case, can you give a thumbs up now that you've seen how this configuration actually works? Okay, everybody? Okay? All right? Good. All right? So, let's go forward in that case. All right? And let's see some real-world examples. All right? if you need to have what is called a power supply, a DC power supply, the one in the laboratory is very sophisticated, but you might, you know, just have a requirement for a single voltage output power supply, or maybe something that you can use to charge up your phone or, you know, charge up the battery in your laptop, or provide electricity for a small personal electric fan or whatever, then you might wonder how it can be done aside from buying something that's off the shelf, all right? Or compared to, or internally, what does the off-the-shelf power supply look like? What is inside? Well, today, the vast majority of the power adapters are what we call as a switch mode approach, which is a very much more advanced way of producing the regulated voltage output. But stepping back a couple of years, okay, stepping back a couple of years, what you would find would be what we now call as a traditional analog or linear power supply. Let me just write that down, all right? Because this is now the terminology that's used to distinguish the possible approaches, okay? So, oh, wait, why am I writing everything here? Black diagram of a linear DC power supply. What you would have inside of a power supply like this would be a power transformer, all right? This would typically be a step down because the voltage that your load would require would typically be less than, you know, the 220 volts Meralco is providing. In this case, the example here is 120 volts because this must be some kind of a transformer or lecture that emanates for a class in the U.S., all right, or something like that. But anyway, so you can imagine that that's either 120 or 220 volts, it doesn't really matter. It goes into a transformer designed for that line voltage, all right, designed for whatever AC power comes into your house, produces an output voltage which is still AC. So you'll notice that the output waveform at each and every one of these points is actually being shown here, all right, so this is the output waveform, V sub S, all right, at this transformer's secondary, this is maybe your V sub P primary, okay, all right, so that's your V sub S, it is still AC, all right, going into our bridge rectifier, probably, all right, and so the output at this point out of the bridge would normally look like this, which is a bunch of pulses. Now you'll notice that the problem with pulses is that they do go all the way down to zero volts, all right, they do go all the way down to zero volts every half cycle. So if this is 160 hertz, all right, if this is a 60 hertz signal, we know that we are going to get these zeros, all right, 120 times per second, all right, the voltage at the output of the bridge rectifier goes all the way down to zero at a rate of 120 times per second. And you think about that, if you're trying to power up something, is it okay for the electricity to disappear briefly at 120 times per second? Now, in certain cases, it's perfectly acceptable, but in most cases, it's not. So there is something that's basically added to the output of the bridge rectifier that acts as a temporary source of voltage or energy for that matter, all right, that fills in those gaps so that the disappearance of the power, all right, is removed. so this temporary energy source, which is labeled here as a filter, all right, is actually nothing but a simple capacitor, all right? A capacitor is placed there to act as a temporary energy storage. You'll notice, you remember that in Citron 1, we were teaching you about capacitors. we can charge a capacitor, right? If we provide current to a capacitor, okay, we charge it up with energy and this allows the capacitor to provide that stored energy when it is demanded. okay, and so look at the output of this. This is exactly a good place for where a capacitor can be used. So, as the voltage from the bridge is rising, okay, this is a problem, the tablet stupid dulo, all right, is spring loaded, it has a sensor on it, and unfortunately, that is interpreted by the software as a signal to stop the presentation, which is kind of dumb. I need to disable that somehow, but I haven't figured out how. Let me just get it running again. Okay, unfortunately, it lost the doodles because of that. That's dumb! Okay, share. Okay, back here. Okay, where were we? And let's turn the pen back on. Okay, so, by adding a capacitor to this circuit, okay, we can now allow the transformer and bridge rectifier to charge up the capacitor, all right? during this part of the cycle, it charges up the capacitor, and when the voltage now begins to drop off, all right, when it begins to drop off, the capacitor takes over and says, okay, you gave me energy a while ago, so I'm going to start giving out that energy that I stored, and so this results in the capacitor discharging, all right? But hopefully it will not discharge so much. So here's the capacitor charging up, and then as the input waveform drops off, the capacitor voltage begins to, Jesus Christ, all right, begins to discharge, all right? It will begin to discharge, but we now get the second pulse coming in, and so it begins to charge up again, and then as that pulse goes downward, it begins to discharge again, and the cycle basically just simply repeats itself again, and again, and again. So at this point, we get this kind of a signal where the supply of power is now not dropping off to zero. In fact, there will be an established minimum voltage, all right, as a result of the finite rate at which the energy from the capacitor is being used up by the load, all right? So if the load is heavy, it will discharge faster. If the load is not so heavy, then the discharge rate will be slower. so this will basically dictate how much the voltage drops off during these portions where the output of the bridge rectifier falls to zero. Okay? All right. Now, sometimes, circuits are still unhappy with how much, you know, with a voltage that is essentially going up and down, all right? This is what we call as ripple, all right? This is a ripple, very much like water ripples. So these are voltage ripples as a result of the capacitor charging and discharging. Okay? So if the circuit is not going to be tolerant of that, if the load cannot tolerate the ripple, we can add what is called as a voltage regulator, all right? And the job of the voltage regulator is to produce an output voltage that is a steady, okay, it's hard to draw, that is a steady DC output voltage, all right? And it does this by taking this ripple voltage input and producing a steady DC output voltage that is lower, all right, that is lower than the lowest possible output ripple, okay? It cannot be magical. It can't be magical. So, the only thing that the voltage regulator can do is basically produce a voltage that is steady as long as its input voltage doesn't fall below the target steady state voltage, okay? So, as a numerical example, if our target voltage voltage is 5 volts, all right, the regulator would have been designed so that it would produce a steady 5 volt output, it would mean that the input coming from the filter must never go lower than 5. So, in fact, in most practical circuits, you need a little bit more than the target output voltage. you need to have a certain headroom, all right, you need to have a certain amount of margin for the voltage regulator to work properly. But, those are details that we can take up in the future. So, for now, just take note and be educated that all of this magic of having a steady state voltage to power up whatever you might have, gadget, be it a complex smartphone or a simple electric fan or even a simple light, all right, comes from this power transformer, bridge rectifier, or whatever. It may not be a bridge. Your transformer could have split secondaries. If that's the case, then you just have a full wave rectifier, typically followed by a filter at the very least to produce a semi-steady DC output voltage from the original AC coming from your outlet. Okay? So, this is how these things are made and how these things basically work. if we have what is called as a linear DC power supply. Okay, doks? All right, so that's the exposition there. Are there questions? Okay, may tanong ba? Magtanong kay Mr. Ong. Questions? Questions? Questions? Questions? Wala? All right, so okay tayo? Thumbs up, please? Okay. Naku, isa na lang nag-thumbs up, tulog na lahat. Yoo-hoo! All right. Yes, Gabriel? Sir, I'd like to clarify lang po regarding the voltage regulator. So, it only gets the lowest point of what the filter said po, the lowest point of the ripple po? Well, it needs to have a minimum voltage to produce the required target voltage. So, you need to think of it in reverse. There is, when you design the voltage regulator, you already have an output voltage in mind. This is what the voltage regulator output needs to produce to power the load properly. Okay, so our example a while ago was that, okay, maybe the load requires five volts, right? And if that is the case, then you would design the rest of the circuit that powers the voltage regulator. So, everything from the transformer to the bridge rectifier to the filter would have been designed to produce a ripple voltage to the regulator that is enough for it to operate properly. and when we say enough, this would mean that the ripple must never fall lower than the target voltage regulator output voltage because if it does, the voltage regulator is not a magical device. It cannot manufacture a voltage that is greater than its input. Do you follow? Yes, sir. Thank you, Paul. All right. So, in other words, if for whatever reason, the voltage going into the regulator falls lower than the target output, then the output voltage of the voltage regulator will fall below the target output. That's the only thing that happens. Right? Okay, so that is essentially the reason why if you pull the plug out, your power supply output disappears because it cannot magically create, you know, voltage out of nothing or even voltage less than, all right, what it was designed if the input to it is not enough. All right? Okay, so there we go. We'll get to more details of that when we advance further and, you know, you find out how the voltage regulator is. you know, what is the circuit inside that voltage regulator block? Again, there are obviously many ways by which this can be accomplished, but we'll start out with the simple one, which is the Zener diode, which we'll see a little bit later. Okay, so other questions? Are there other questions? Do you have a question? No. Okay. All right. So let's go forward with this. Why did I exit the slideshow? Because it so happened to exit? Or am I still, ah, it's still in presentation pala. Okay. Sige. So let's move forward. Okay. What is this? How do I get this out of the way? Half-wave rectifier equivalent circuit of a half-wave rectifier with diode replaced with its model two equivalent, the transfer characteristic of the rectifier. Okay. This one is in fact a model three equivalent. Okay. All right. So this one is just simply showing that we will get a more realistic V sub O if we replace the ideal diode with, you know, instead of model one, we might use model two or model three, and it will produce an output voltage that is closer to reality. All right. so you might recall that our model three, all right, is composed of an ideal diode, a voltage, plus an equivalent conduction resistance. Okay. So the resulting transfer function will look something like this, which is a little bit closer to our real world, sorry, real world diode characteristic. So it's definitely not an exponential, so the accuracy of the result is not necessarily that great, but in a circuit where you're using the diode as a rectifier, for example, to power something like a voltage regulator, you basically know the target current, or you'll know what the load characteristics are. You're designing a power supply for a known requirement, okay, and because you know what the requirement is, for example, we know that it is going to be a 5 volt 2 ampere load, okay, then you know the amount of current that this thing is expected to deliver, and so therefore, you'll also be able to determine how much current is going to be passing through the individual diodes in that rectifier configuration, and because you know what the currents are going to be, you'll be able to determine, as long as you have the transfer characteristic of that particular diode, you'll be able to calculate an equivalent RD, which is close to the operating points of the diode in question, okay, all right, or, most honestly speaking, it might be simply easier to just use a circuit simulator like LPSpice, hint, hint, to give you a much better, closer to the real world approximation of what will happen, okay, because beautifully, the models in LPSpice, which do include different kinds of diodes, are going to come very, very close to what the real world device will operate like, okay, all right, but why are we teaching you this? You might argue, eh, sir, but hindi na lang tayo gumamit ng ! simulation, et cetera, all the time. Well, you don't always have the luxury of having a simulator, ! and it takes time to set up the simulation as well. If you are familiar with things like this, it might be that you can already estimate the output without even doing any calculations. As long as you understand what the basic characteristics are like, you can already say, oh, the waveform is going to look like, well, not like that, the waveform is already going to look like this, and I know that the peak voltage is going to be less by approximately one volt from the power source because this thing is going to be a combination that will drop approximately one volt with the amount of current that's expected to flow through our resistor. So given that, you notice that I didn't even have to use any calculation. It's just an estimate. And for many engineering requirements, such an estimate is already enough. And if you need more precision, then yeah, why not use a computer? Okay, so there you go. Let's get this out of the way again. All right. So what is this? Oh, this is showing you the full wave rectifier going into the, we already discussed this. So you'll notice that this is your basic bridge configuration. Very often, it is drawn as a diamond. You might notice that. And in this case, it's just a repositioning of the load resistor. So this is not any different from the circuit a while ago. You'll notice that the supposed positive output of the bridge would have gone into the road resistor, RL, in the previous drawing, and RL would have been connected to ground. So you'll notice that this particular R goes from the output of that thing, from the bridge output, and it's connected to the other side, which is connected to ground. So this is one and the same circuit actually drawn slightly differently. Okay, so same thing. It's the same four diodes. In this case, it's labeled D1, D2, D3, and D4. Kanina, it was ABCD. And so now you know that D1 and D2 work as pairs, and then D4 and D3 work as the other pair, with these guys working on the positive portion of the conduction cycle, and the other pair works on the negative portion of the cycle to produce a full wave output like so. And here it is showing, all right, one thing that you might want to take note of is because the power from the secondary passes through two diodes all the time, all right, be it on the positive or negative cycle, it passes through a pair of diodes. the output voltage here is smaller than the source voltage by 2 times V sub D. 2 times V sub D. Kasi meron tayong sinubtract na V sub D dito at yung pabalik meron din na sub track na isa pang V sub D. So it is smaller by a factor of 2 times V sub D. Compared to the other full wave circuit which uses this configuration, you only have one diode conducting at a time. Okay, so you can have your node resistor here. I know, all right, and because you're passing through only one diode, the difference here is that the output will be less than the source voltage by just one V sub D. Kasi isa-isa lang ang dinadaanan niya at time. So there are advantages and disadvantages to using a full bridge configuration such as this versus this one. Both of them produce full wave outputs, but there are pros and cons. Okay, the pro obviously of this particular approach is that the transformer needs to have only a single continuous winding whereas in this other circuit it requires a split or has to have a center top. Okay, and on the other side of it the disadvantage on the other hand of this guy is there are two voltage drops involved whereas with this one there is only a single voltage drop involved so it's got a slightly higher efficiency because of that. Okay, all right, so having said that, hopefully we're okay with this. We'll get more details or you'll get to understand this perhaps a little bit better in fact when you do your experiment number two. Okay, because experiment number two is about rectification and clipping. All right, so let's move forward. Maaga pa, wala pang 9 o'clock, 8.30 pa lang. So let's go to Zener diodes or some people say Zener, some people say Zener. I don't quite remember. Maybe somebody can quickly look it up. What does the internet say about how this is supposed to be pronounced? Is it Zener or Zenner? I think it's Zener. All right, I believe it's Zener. It just makes it sound more social. All right, so anyway, so whatever the case is, I'll use Zener and if you find that that's not the way to pronounce it, let me know. Okay, all right, so Zener diodes are special diodes which have been designed to operate with a certain breakdown. They're intended to operate in the breakdown region. They're intended to be used in reverse, in other words, allowing the voltage to reach what is called as its breakdown region or Zener knee voltage. Okay, now you might wonder why would you want to do that? Well, the answer essentially is that a Zener used in this way can become or is usually being used as a way to get voltage regulation. Okay, all right, manufacturers essentially create diodes with additional modified doping, all right, what is doping? It's the addition of impurities into the silicon, all right, so that the breakdown voltage is made a lot lower than normal. okay, so the manufacturers can actually control the amount of doping and thus create diodes with various different breakdown voltages. Now, you might recall that resistors are available only with certain values. You saw this in the laboratory and see from LBY-PRN1, all right, you might have been looking for something like a 1.15 kilo-ohm resistor, but you found out very quickly that there is no such thing. It's not available. You'd have to settle for the closest match, which would be a 1.0K, all right, or a 1.2K resistor. So the resistors follow a certain pattern of increasing values. There's nothing in between. So this is what we call the EIA 12 or 24 or 48 classification. So available lang siya in certain values. So same thing with Zener diodes. They are available with a certain set of breakdown voltages, which are sort of reminiscent or similar to the EIA or E12 series of resistors, but more limited, and there are some values in between. And certainly there are limits as to how low is the lowest available Zener diode breakdown voltage. So there are limits. So again, what is the Zener diode used for? Well, that strong and sharp per knee characteristic is a good way to get voltage regulation. You'll notice that it clamps down and limits the voltage at a particular Zener knee voltage. So if it does that, it means that even if I have a varying negative voltage on it, the Zener can clamp it in such a way that it does not go beyond its Zener knee voltage. Okay? All right. So that's why it is a good-ish voltage regulator. It's actually not good. Okay? It is a voltage regulator. It does a pair-ish job of regulating, but I would not really call it a good voltage regulator. I would say that it's a voltage regulator that is simple to implement because all it takes is one resistor and one Zener diode. Okay? and that would be a simple voltage regulator with a lot of limitations and not particularly great regulation. All right? It will do, you know, it will make the regulation, it will produce a semi-constant voltage output, certainly much less ripple than what you'd get straight out of a simple bridge followed by a full-wave bridge followed by a capacitor. So it will be able to make those ripples a lot less, but in no way can you say that it is really, really, really steady. Okay? All right? Because the knee is not exactly particularly sharp. Okay? There's still a slight bend to that. All right? And it doesn't exactly conduct that well. It's not a very, very sharp 90-degree transition. Just the same way as a forward biased diode is not exactly 0.7. It actually starts conducting at about 0.5. So same with the Zener. It's a little bit better than that, but again, there are slight variations. Okay? All right. So let's have a look. Okay. So ayan. All right? So here is the proper term here. Zener diodes are used to get a reasonably regulated DZ voltage. All right? When the input voltage and or the load resistance varies. Of course, the more variation that you have in the input voltage or the more the load resistance varies. When you say the load resistance varies, this basically means that the amount of current that the load is demanding varies a lot. All right? Not always a constant two amperes. All right? It can change. And if these variables are going about, then we can't really expect that the Zener diode will produce a very, very steady output voltage. It will also vary. And the magnitude of its DC output variation is dependent on how big these changes in operating conditions are. So the question point moves about, and because the question point moves about, we can expect that there will be variation in the Zener output voltage. Okay? Now, regulation essentially is achieved by passing a controlled current through the Zener diode in its breakdown region. Okay? A controlled amount of current. Controlled meaning that we cannot allow the current to become too large because the Zener diode will blow up. all right? And if the current becomes zero, then the Zener diode obviously cannot have that because it will have no current to actually be in the reverse breakdown. All right? It cannot be in its breakdown region if no current is flowing through it in reverse. So, bottom line is there are limits as to how much a Zener diode can achieve. All right? So, the nominal breakdown voltage V sub Z or V sub Z K in certain literature, Zener Ni, is specified as the Zener voltage. It is its specification particularly. All right? So, we know that Zener diodes are available with a breakdown voltage of 4.7 volts. We know that there is also an 8.2 volt Zener diode. I can also add that there's a 6.8 volt Zener diode. There is also a 5.1 volt Zener diode. These are popular voltages that are available. all right? But if you were to say, sir, meron bang Zener diode na 5.0 volts ang output, the answer is no. There's none. Okay? It's not available. All right? So, you'll have to look specifically at the portfolio of the available voltages and if you are exposed enough, then it becomes something that you basically memorize, have memorized without intentionally memorizing it. All right? Something that you happen to memorize because of just being familiar with it. Okay? So, for example, as I said, I have a certain degree of familiarity with it, so I know that the 5.0 is not available. And I also know that very typically you can find that the lowest available Zener voltage is approximately 3.0 volts. Okay? So, Zener diodes are not offered in a voltage that is lower than 3 volts. All right? In fact, it already becomes iffy at about 3.3 volts. So, these are about the limit of how low a Zener breakdown voltage can be made by the semiconductor industry. So, this is pretty much the limit. You won't find anything lower than this. Okay? And in the opposite direction, we do have Zener diodes that are rated at 50 volts, 48 volts, or something like that. But there's less and less of that because the idea there is if the voltage, Zener voltage breakdown that you need is so high, all right, then maybe you don't really need a Zener in the first place. All right? Reason being that these are real world devices which do have a maximum power rating. All right? There is a maximum power rating. And if the Zener voltage, the voltage is something like 48 volts, it's very easy to reach that maximum power rating kasi P is equal to V times I. Right? So itong V na to, this would be the V sub Z of the Zener. E kung 48 volts na yan, e konting current lang, nandito ka na sa maximum power rating ng diode. So it's not that, you know, it's not offered typically with very high voltage ratings because it would be very easy to overwhelm the maximum power limit that a Zener diode can handle. Okay? All right. So one other thing is that the electronic symbol for a Zener is this one. So it's a little bit different. You can tell that it's a Zener diode by the fact that an ordinary diode has a straight, whatever you want to call that, okay? derecho lang siya. All right? So yan ang ordinary diode. And if it is a Zener, then it is drawn with these bends at the end. Sometimes, you know, it's drawn with like this. All right? Basta may konting paktak. All right? Just remember that they are in opposing directions. Okay? So that thing cannot look like this, and it cannot be like that. That's wrong. Okay? They're opposing. All right? And so that's your Zener diode symbol. If you see a diode that looks like that, then you know automatically, oh, that's a Zener diode. and you'd expect that if it were on a schematic, they would hopefully be labeled properly that it would provide the voltage rating of the device. All right? So that you'd know what its characteristics are. Okay, docks? All right, so yan ang ating Zener diode. And, okay, so the slides over here are supposed to expound on how it is supposed to be used. Okay? May natatakpan dito, unfortunately. Let me just try to move it around. The problem that I have here is I can't grab this thing without triggering some, ayan, okay, yeah, I was able to grab it. Okay. It doesn't seem to be a place I can put it. Can I make, how do I make this thing disappear anyway? I think I can't. All right, so here is an example of a Zener diode being used as a voltage regulator, all right, with a varying load. All right, and so now that you've seen that, let me just drag this back up here. All right, and let's try to determine, all right, how this thing is supposed to work. So, okay, just as a quick reminder here, in this case, ah, yeah, okay, so in this application or sample, we happen to have a voltage source that is steady, all right? We happen to have a voltage source that is steady, but it is 24 volts. okay, okay, and we want it in such a way, or we want to design something in such a way that the voltage that is delivered to a load resistor, okay, is lower than 24, perhaps because the load, okay, requires a lower voltage than 24 volts, and our node is also supposed to vary, where it might vary between 6k, as one example, and another situation where that load might be 1.2 kilo-aubs. now, remember that our RL here is not necessarily a resistor. We typically use a resistor equivalent to show and calculate what it would behave like, what the circuit would behave like, into a load that may not necessarily be a simple resistor. It could be something a lot more complex, but we're emulating that, or simulating that, using an equivalent resistance, just to make the calculations possible. So, the load has an equivalent resistance of 6 kilo-aubs and 1.2 kilo-aubs, and perhaps anything in between that. We're just calculating the two extremes that's been provided here, and maybe the real load has a varying demand that falls in between these two equivalent resistance values. So, what the target in this case is, is to determine what is the voltage that is going to be given to the load, and how much is it going to vary as the load equivalent resistance changes. Okay? Now, how do you do that? Well, if you want to produce an accurate calculation, this particular slide tells you how. So, here, you are given that this is 1.2 K, this is 24 volts, right? Our RL varies between 6K and 1.2K, right? What is not given, you'll notice, is we don't know anything about the Zener at all. Because it's not given yet. This is just showing you how the calculation is done. So, the information is not given. Anyway, so, given this, all right, what you're required to do to actually get the answer will be, of course, to know what the Zener characteristic is like. It will come in later, all right? But the basic step essentially, all right, find I sub S and V sub L using the Zener characteristic. And in order to do that, all right, in order to do that, we first redraw the circuit, which is, you know, pretty simple, just a changing of the positions, okay? And then we replace the circuit here with its Thevenin equivalent so that it becomes a single Thevenin resistor with a single voltage source, all right? And when we have that, then we can proceed with the calculations given this one, all right? Okay. Now, this one can be approached using, for example, a DC load line once we have calculated the equivalent Thevenin source, all right? So, let's see. here's the example of that calculation. Compute the Thevenin equivalent of the previous circuit with the Zener diode as the load, all right? aka the circuit is composed of R and RL, all right? Itong R, all right, and RL, okay? So, first, calculate the Thevenin voltage, all right? How do I calculate the Thevenin voltage? If you might recall, we take out the load, and we calculate what is called as the open circuit voltage, voltage, and that is the equivalent Thevenin voltage. So, let me redraw it because you might have gotten lost, okay? Ito yung redrawn circuit natin, all right? This one here, this is your circuit so that you can try to find the Thevenin equivalent, and how do we do that? We remove the diode, all right, and find what is called as the Thevenin open circuit voltage. So, that is taken here. Ito yung V sub Thevenin natin, all right? So, paano natin gagawin yun? So, makikita natin, all right, this is actually very easy, it's 24 volts going into, all right, our two resistors, ito yung voltage output dapat natin, all right? There's our voltage output, this is where your Zener diode would have been placed, but we're doing the Thevenin calculation, so for now, we are removing that Zener diode and just looking at it, and this is R, and this is your RL. And so, this is nothing but a simple voltage divider, which basically follows this one. So, F-C-VT, all right, F-C-VT, VT is simply equal to VSS multiplied by, because we are taking the voltage at the bottom here, multiplied by RL, all right, divided by the series combination of R and RL. So, dyan lalabas yung equation na yan, and the result, essentially, is that given the values, ano nga ba yung values? All right? Ano ba yung values natin? 24 volts, all right, 1.2K, and RL is either 6 kilo-ohms or 1.2 kilo-ohms, all right? So, given this, if you have an RL of 6 kilo-ohms, you will get a VT of 20 volts, and if the RL is 1.2K, all right, the output voltage is 12 volts. Ano ba yung? Is that correct? 1, 1, 2, yeah, okay, tama, 24 kasi. All right? So, substituting lang, ano, 24 volts, RL is 6K, all right? R is 1K, RL is 6K, all right? So, 6 divided by 7 multiplied to 24. Okay? Tama ba? Hindi ko alam kung tama. All right? 6 divided by 7. Teka, hindi naman 20 ang lalabas dun, ha? Hello? Parang mali. Huh? Wait, where's the calculator? Nobody figured that or not. It looks wrong. Okay, it looks wrong. R L, tama yung formula, eh, pero mali yung numerical answers dito. Wait, let me just get my calculator. Oops! Hang on. Bakit tumunog? Ah, okay, wala pa. Malapit na mag 9, pero not yet. Okay, we still have a few moments. Let me just finish this. All right. All right. 6 divided by 7 equals times 24. Ah, 20.57. Tama naman. Okay. Roughly. Ah, all right? So, the exact, more exact answer is 20.57 volts. Okay. And, for this other one, it is basically 24 times 1.2 divided by 1.2 plus 1. Okay. And, that produces, layo naman ang estimate, 13.1 volts. Okay. No wonder I was looking, I was saying, huh, that doesn't seem numerically right. So, these are the two answers. Okay. Somebody's rounding it off like mad. Okay. Now, the equivalent 7 in resistance is just, again, right? How do we do that? Well, it turns out that to get the 7 in resistance, do you call, recall this from Citron, 1. What we do is, we short out, all right, the voltage source, and we look at the equivalent resistance from the viewpoint of the load. So, what is that going to look like? So, it's going to look like this, all right? Short out the voltage source. This is 1k. So, yeah, and this is, you know, two different resistance values. Again, 6k or 1.2k, and it's looking this way, you know, looking this way. So, these are just two resistors in parallel. So, there's your parallel resistor formula. Okay? And again, if you do this calculation with the two different values, you will get something like this. I'm not confident anymore with the answers here because they seem to be sort of rounded off weirdly in the case of the voltages. so I don't know if these resistance values are accurate. But anyway, having done that, whatever the results are, you are now in a position, okay, to write out an equation that will allow you to actually do the determination of what is the resulting Zener output voltage if you have the Zener diode characteristics. Okay? All right? So, as I said, you can approach this if you have the transfer function of the Zener. All right? Highly visible, very nicely printed out on a piece of paper and scaled properly. Okay? You can do a DC load line for those two different conditions. Okay? So, ito yung dalawang different conditions conditions, no? All right? And given that, you're going to get the intersection points. Okay? And you will see that the output voltage of the Zener diode will vary. All right? in this case, I think this is overly emphasized, but because the slope here looks extremely terrible. And so, in this case, your estimated Zener output voltage, you see that the intersection point here is minus 10 volts. And the other intersection point here is somewhere here. Let's just say that that is something like negative 9.5 volts. Okay? So, maybe based on this DC load line analysis, our predicted Zener output voltage is negative 10 and negative 9.5, which means that again, recalling the problem, all right, even as our load equivalent resistance varies between 6k and 1.2k, even as it varies by that much, you'll notice that the voltage supplied to it does not change that greatly. All right? Konti lang yung change. 0.5 volts lang yung variation ng output voltage natin. Despite a very, very significant amount of current demand change as reflected by that very large difference between equivalent load resistances. Okay? All right? So, there's your answer. All right? So, the voltage change, as I said, looks like it's about 0.5 volts. All right? And that's basically due to the fact that the transfer function of the diode Zener breakdown is not a totally vertical line. It does have a slight slope. All right? Okay. So, there you go with that. and that's the sample calculation. Of course, you probably, you know, maybe, hopefully, you picked that up clearly enough. All right? But, the idea here is that we really just wanted to show you that, oh, well, hey, a Zener can be used to regulate the output voltage. So, going back to the example power supply that we had a while ago, all right? That's the, this thing's about to hang, all right? That's the completion sort of the discussion here. we've actually had a very quick look, at least a first glance at, you know, how to put a power supply together, all right, that is able to provide a so-so reasonable, maybe, regulation or regulated output to a target design load. Okay? All right, and so, that's it. Going back to you now, it's nine o'clock, and so, this is where we're supposed to end our lesson, but before we do so, can I elicit a response from you? Do you have any questions with what we have covered thus far? Meron bang tanong? Now is a good time to ask before you get dismissed. Are there questions, people? I can hear the bell. Questions? No questions? Are you guys still there? Can you guys give me a thumbs up if we're all okay? All right. Okie dokie. All right, so, thank you for joining us today, and for those with the lab class, I'll see you guys later at 11, face-to-face tayo, G407. Alright, bye bye! Alright! Alright! Alright! Alright! Alright!
