Thank you. All right. Good morning, everybody. We'll start in about a minute. Just waiting for other people to log in and preparing the presentation. Hopefully, it will be smooth today. All right. I'll just shut up for now and let's just wait for the others to come in. Let me just unpause this and bring up the screen. Okay. Hang on. Slide show. So, start with where we left off from last time. Is it this one? Yes. Okay. Here we go. All right. Of course, as usual, if you have any questions, kindly, don't be hesitant. Let me know. You can unmute or just chat me up. Just raise your hand. Okay. All right. We stopped here last meeting where we started on discussing what a clamp circuit is, a clamping circuit or clamper. So, essentially, the definition of a clamper is that it is a circuit that moves the waveform. All right. To a different DC position. So, some of these circuits, or at least in this particular example, the input waveform doesn't actually, versus the output waveform shape doesn't actually change. So, this is a distinction between what a clamper does versus a clipper. A clipper changes the look or shape of the waveform, whereas a clamper basically, at least here in this example, does not. It just moves it around. And this movement, all right, this DC position change is facilitated through the action of a capacitor. It's dependent, very, very dependent on the capacitor charging and discharging. So, there are time constants involved. But that gets deeper into the subject, which makes it a little bit more difficult to understand. So, let's start with the fundamental. How does it manage to move that waveform, in this case, downward in the first place? So, hang on. I forgot to turn on the pen. There we go. And yeah, that seems to be working. So, the explanation, essentially, is that in the positive cycle of the input, all right, remember that the input is basically varying symmetrically above and below zero, all right? In this case, in the example, in the example, it reaches a peak of plus 15 volts and a negative peak symmetrically of minus 15. So, in the first half of the cycle, which is this portion that we see here, all right? What happens, going back to the circuit, sorry, if I have to switch back and forth, all right? What happens, essentially, is that you'll notice that with this polarity and on the assumption that, remember, okay, we've discussed what you call as DC or steady state conditions, all right? Versus sending an AC signal into a capacitor. So, remember the basic principle of the capacitor. It likes to charge up, all right? And discharge. So, we start with the assumption that the capacitor is discharged. It does not have any voltage, all right? So, V sub C initially, all right, V sub C initially is zero. So, any voltage that you put, all right, will attempt to flow current through zero, all right? So, if you want to write the KVL expression, for example, just to make things clear, you start with negative V in plus V sub C, all right? Going through here and going downwards, plus V sub D minus five, all right, is equal to zero. That's the initial equation, initial equation. And in this example given, the peak voltage here, all right? Peak voltage here. The peak-to-peak voltage here, all right, is seemed to be 10 volts, all right? So, thing here is, all right, even if we don't know what this is, we know that the current will flow this way. And what you can see is that it is flowing in the direction of the diode, all right? It's flowing in the direction of the diode. And the end result, of course, is that the diode, where did we append go? The diode will conduct, all right? And if we assume for the sake of simplicity that it is an ideal diode, our diode conduction voltage will be equal to zero. So, we can just remove that, okay? And so, what are we going to get? We're going to get, essentially, an equation, all right, with V sub C equal to zero initially, all right? That, indeed, the current will flow. The diode will conduct, all right? And we're going to get an equation that's composed of just voltages, which is impossible, all right? Particularly if the voltage V in and 5 volts are not the same voltage here, if they're not equal. So, what actually happens is that you will get an instantaneous current, a large one, in fact, flowing through the circuit, which will very, very quickly charge up the capacitor. Such that the capacitor voltage is going to be equal to V in minus 5 volts, all right? Ah, no, wait, plus 5, sorry. Okay? Because both of them are negative. So, when you transfer it to the right side, both of them become positive, okay? So, Vc is going to be V in plus 5 volts. So, it will instantaneously charge to that voltage, all right? Through the fact that the initial condition will force a large amount of current, in theory, infinite, but not, all right? The reality is not. A theoretically infinite amount of voltage that will instantaneously charge the capacitor as this V in, all right, goes through its upward swing. It will be instantaneously charging the capacitor, all right, until the capacitor reaches this maximum voltage, which corresponds with this peak. Okay? All right? So, that's what's happening. So, in the positive half cycle, C gets charged through D to plus 10 volts, all right? Sorry, this is supposed to be plus 5, minus 5, okay? All right? So, it'll get charged to that, all right? So, we get that much voltage, all right, onto our capacitor. Vc will equal 10 volts, okay? With that polarity shown, okay? With that polarity shown. Okay. Now, what happens next, all right? What happens next is that we go down towards the negative cycle, okay? And in the negative cycle, and even, in fact, before the negative cycle, as we're coming downwards here, all right, remember that our capacitor is already charged, okay? So, given that Vc is already charged, it's 10 volts, all right? It's become 10 volts. As the voltage here drops, okay? As the voltage here drops, we get an equation out of this, all right? We can now substitute. Pumabot ito kanina ng maximum of 5 volts. Meron tayong 5 volts dito. This forces the capacitor to become 10 volts to equalize the equation. It is 10 is equal to 5 plus 5. That's where we pick, okay? Now, as this V in voltage starts going down, it becomes 4 volts, it becomes 3 volts, 4 volts, 3 volts, 2 volts, 1 volt, 0, okay? Going downwards. You'll notice that, of course, we now have an imbalance in the equation. This becomes impossible again, all right? Now, imagine that the capacitor is charged to 10. What will happen, all right? What is going to happen as this voltage goes downward? Is the capacitor going to get instantaneously discharged? The answer is no, because remember, we have a diode there. And as the voltage begins to go down, our current actually will begin to try to go in the reverse direction. Remember, if the capacitor is discharging, the current implication is that it's trying to go in the opposite direction. That's the only way the capacitor will discharge. But as we try to go in the opposite direction, you'll notice that this is now going in the reverse direction against what the diode is allowed to conduct. And so our diode now becomes an open circuit, all right? It now absorbs that voltage difference, all right? It now absorbs that voltage difference, allowing the capacitor to theoretically, or at least, you know, for now, remain at 10 volts, all right? And the diode opens up so that the diode voltage across it becomes reverse bias, and the voltage across it starts to build up to equalize this equation, all right? So now that you can see that, all right, now that you can see that, you look at the polarity of this guy. Remember that it is positive here. It's negative here, all right? And as this voltage goes downward and actually towards the negative, the diode will remain open, all right? The diode will remain open. And you'll notice that the polarity of V in is now negative and positive, all right? Which is the same polarity as the capacitor. It's the same direction. So you'll notice that the voltage across the capacitor and the voltage of V in are in the same polarity. It's like two series voltage sources, which produces a massively larger polarity across this whole structure. Okay? So much, much larger polarity across this whole structure. How large? Well, you can see that this is 10 and this is 5 so that the total voltage is negative 15. Okay? So makikita natin na nag-charge yung capacitor and because the capacitor charged up, it charged up to 10 volts, this is the voltage of the capacitor itself. All right? And as the supply goes negative, all right? It will add up to that capacitor voltage its own extra 5 volts. Okay? Yan yung 5 volts niya. All right? So that it now will force the waveform across the resistor to actually go downward by this much. All right? And you can continue this analysis and what you're going to see is that this output waveform is going to look like this. If the capacitor remains charged to 10 volts, you're going to get an output waveform that is sinusoidal. All right? With an offset now of minus 10 and a peak-to-peak voltage equal to our original input voltage. All right? So that's how the clamper basically works. All right? So the output can reach a maximum of negative 15. All right? And this essentially is what a clamper does. Now, admittedly, it might be a little bit hard to visualize this. That's why we took it step by step. All right? So the capacitor action, by having charged up to a particular voltage, now sustains and produces a different continuous DC output. All right? Or place where the waveform is. Now, of course, you should have the question of doesn't the capacitor discharge? The answer is yes. Where is that discharge path? Well, look at it with the way the current is flowing. The current is actually, because the diode's open, all right? The diode is open circuit. Your path for the current flowing is actually through the resistive load here. So the capacitor does discharge because of the fact that it is supplying its current through the power source over into our load where there is a current that is flowing. So the capacitor, assuming, or at least supposed to be, if you choose your capacitor to be fairly large so that it has a large reservoir of energy, all right, and your resistance does not drain that energy a very, very large amount, So you can imagine that you can't drop, you can imagine that the capacitor voltage will drop a little or slowly, right, as we go through this negative cycle. So it will drop, which means that you're not really going to reach negative 15. It will be a little bit less than that because of the capacitor discharging. But as it goes through the zero and begins to go back to the positive portion, it will turn on the diode again, all right, at the appropriate voltage if there is a voltage difference established between this guy and this guy just like before. And so this will instantaneously recharge that capacitor back to the original 10 volts, okay? So every cycle, every time we go towards our peak positive, the capacitor has a chance to recharge. And then through this portion after the peak, as it goes down and goes here, and as it goes back towards the next part, it will be discharging up to the point that we reach wherever it is discharged, and then it will recharge again. And then back down, discharge, discharge, discharge, discharge, discharge, back up, recharge for that brief moment back to 10 volts, okay? So we get the cycle such that each and every time we go, there is a charging cycle that reestablishes that voltage. That's why there is this equation here, all right, which says that the RC type constant, all right, is much, much greater than the frequency, all right, period. And that's an important statement, all right? Hopefully, if you understand its significance now, we must ensure that we recharge the capacitor in time before it discharges a lot, okay? That discharge cycle is established by this value, which is C times R, which basically says how fast it will discharge, all right? And you'll see that the discharge time is assumed to be much, much bigger than the period of V in, all right? This is the period of V in, if you didn't recognize it, 2 pi over omega, all right? This is the period of V in, all right? So that's the assumption. It's discharging slowly enough such that the cycle by cycle time is enough to recharge it without the voltage of the capacitor dropping off too significantly, okay? All right? Are there questions? Of course, you probably had some difficulty kind of understanding that, all right? So a single diode plus capacitor, all right, is a voltage shifter, all right? It's a voltage shifter. A clamp is a voltage shifter. In this case, we got it to go down to negative 10 through this particular arrangement, okay? All right? Now, so your question might be, what is the use of being able to shift it down? Well, there might be, all right, an application where you need a voltage, all right? If you look at it, originally we had this voltage here which was riding up and below zero, all right? And maybe the application requires that the waveform goes downward. Now, admittedly, at this point, you probably don't really see where that possibility is, all right? But, okay, but look at this. We can take advantage of the fact that we have a circuit that can shift it down like so, all right? And if we can shift it, all right, we can add a rectifier after the shifting, okay? And the voltage that you get out of the rectifier is a DC voltage that is not normally possible to get without that shifting, all right? So here is an example of that particular circuit, a more practical one. You'll notice that there is no battery or voltage extra here. So this is an application of a clamp circuit. So if we can shift the waveform, all right, and then rectify it, we can get a rectified DC voltage that is very different, all right? That is greater than the peak voltage of the voltage source. And in theory, for example, in this case, the voltage that you can extract here is twice as high, all right? It's higher by a factor of two over the DC voltage, all right? Again, of course, you're riding on the assumption that the amount of time that it takes to discharge the capacitors, all right, is much, much greater than the period of the input source waveform, okay? So again, if it is, you know, a significant part of it, you will know the end result is that the output voltage will be much lower than the expected times two, all right? But the closer we are, or the bigger the time constant we have versus how fast or how short the period is, the closer we are to the theoretical doubling of the voltage. Now, just keep in mind, this is, maybe it might be good if you put this in quotation marks, okay? Because it does not really reach double from the fact that no matter how you look at it, in the real world, the diodes will take up and not be able to be zero volt conduction devices. They will take up 0.7 volts out of this, you know, and then, so it's a 0.7 plus 0.7. The output voltage here is going to be twice V1 minus 0.7 and minus a little more from the fact that the capacitors are discharging. So medyo lalayo talaga yan dun sa theoretical double voltage, okay? All right, now, the thing here is, well, it's still an interesting circuit with very, very practical uses because the ability to double the voltage in this case means that, well, why don't we look at it, all right? So if I have V in, all right, is there an explanation? Never, all right, but, you know, it's on the wrong page. Okay, so let's say I have this voltage here. This is V1, okay? All right? Oh, by the way, before you get the wrong impression, all right, the input voltage does not have to be sinusoidal, all right? It can be any alternating current voltage. So, in fact, all right, in fact, you might have an easier time. Sorry, I didn't think about this, but you might have an easier time understanding and visualizing how this circuit works, all right? And even the previous one, how it works, if we change the voltage, all right, here, the excitation voltage, V1, if we turn it into a square wave, and, you know, the circuit will function with the square wave. It doesn't really care what waveform it is, all right? So, let's change V1, all right, back to pen, sorry, all right? And let's say we have a square wave para madali ang buhay. Mas madaling mag-analyze ng square wave, okay? And let's say, for the sake of argument, our square wave is swinging plus 10 and minus 10 volts, okay? All right, all right? Now, here's the thing. If I have my V1, all right, if I have my V1, what am I going to do with a square wave coming out? And as I said, plus 10, minus 10, all right? So, here's my square wave. And then I put it into a standard rectified thing. Like so. And here's my V0, all right? What will the output of this circuit look like? Ito muna, all right? Ito muna para at least mas ma-appreciate natin at maintindihan yung voltage doubler. Ano yung itsura ng V0 natin, okay? So, here is our V1, all right? And let's draw this out. There's V1 here. Okay? And as I said, it is swinging plus 10, minus 10, okay? So, this is our V1, all right? So, my question is, what does VO look like through the rectifier? So, you probably, or I hope you do, you recognize and remember that this is a half-wave rectifier, all right? It's a half-wave rectifier. And given that the direction of the diode is like so, with your anode towards the source and your cathode towards the destination or load, you recognize this as a positive half-wave rectifier, all right? Just, you know, pedantic, pat-pat, pat. Half-wave, all right? So, positive half-wave rectifier. If we make the diode, all right, if we make the diode reversed like so, all right, then you'd call it as a negative half-wave rectifier. Okay? So, in this case, it's a positive half-wave rectifier. And what does the output waveform look like? All right? Now, given that it is a positive half-wave rectifier, we recognize that if this is on its positive cycle, the current will be going in the same direction as our diode where it will conduct. And so, therefore, even if we include that forward voltage of the diode, we will see that during this, because it rises very quickly, all right, our diode will conduct in the positive cycle and be a little bit less than the 10 volts, no? In fact, it will be at 9.3 volts because of 0.7 volts of drop, okay? And it will follow the waveform. And then as it goes through the negative cycle, it will stop conducting. So, the output becomes zero. Okay? And every time we hit a positive input cycle of the waveform, all right, of V1, our diode will conduct and almost reach positive 10. All right? It will be off by 0.7. And then, yun nga, towards this time where the thing goes negative, it stops conducting. Okay? Okay? And so, we're going to get this kind of an output waveform where this one is your V sub O. Okay? All right? So, are you following people? All right? Okay ba tayo? Naintindihan? Yes? Okay? Okay. So, square wave is a lot easier, di ba? It's a lot easier because you just say on, off, on, off, on, off. All right? Now, what happens when we have it going into a voltage doubler? Anong itsura ng ating output dito? Okay? So, let's find out. All right? So, during the positive excursion, right, during this part of the input cycle, we start out with the idea that the voltage across the... Wait. Okay. It's probably better. Sorry. Erase, erase, erase. Okay? Because of the way that the thing is configured, let's start out with the negative cycle. Okay? Dito muna. Wag to. All right? We start out with the negative part of the cycle. Okay? Just because it's less confusing if I do so. So, let's start with the negative cycle. So, let's call this phase A. All right? So, I have a current attempting to flow in this direction. Okay? And you'll notice that because it's attempting to flow in this counterclockwise direction. All right? Negative. All right? So, pag-gant to, and makikita nyo that this is in fact indeed in the direction of the first diode D2. All right? It's in fact in the direction of diode D2. And for the sake of simplicity, all right, we can assume that if D2 is conducting, it will short. All right? Wag na natin isipon yung extra 0.7 muna. All right? And if it is shorted, all right, what you can see is that this is in fact a minus plus, ilan volts to? 10. All right? Shorted through the diode going into our capacitor C1. You're following. All right? There's that shorted diode. There's that D2. But it's acting as a short. So, you'll see that our 10 volt source appears to be connected basically to our capacitor. All right? If you want to redraw that, it looks basically like this. Okay? There is our capacitor. There is our D1, which is acting like a short circuit. All right? Connected to our capacitor C1. So, what happens? Well, pretty obviously, our C1 voltage, all right, will follow and have exactly the same voltage, which is 10 volts. Okay? So, during this negative portion of our input waveform, the power source, V1, charges the capacitor instantaneously to its voltage, which will be following this polarity like so. And this one is going to be 10 volts. You follow? All right? Okay? Therefore, our VO for now is zero. Okay? Are you following, people? Are we okay? All right? Nagues niyo? Okay? All right. Now, watch this. Magic. Okay? Now, what happens when we go into the next cycle where this one becomes positive? Okay? So, our polarity will change. All right? This is now plus 10. And the assumption, again, of course, is that the capacitor is not yet, or if, you know, hasn't had the chance to discharge. So, you'll see that this polarity, negative, positive, and our capacitor, which is also at the same voltage, has this polarity. So, pag tinignan niyo itong dalawa, ang total voltage natin ngayon dito ay 20 volts with this particular polarity. Plus on top, minus at the bottom. 20 volts ang lumabas. Okay? Gets niyo? All right? Now, look at this polarity. It's reverse biased against our diode. The diode will become an open circuit. Okay? Because we're trying to flow the current in this direction clockwise during this positive cycle. The current direction is clockwise. Our diode will become an open circuit. And the full voltage, series voltage of C1 and V1 are now together to produce 20 volts. And because this is now 20 volts, the electricity now goes in this direction. All right? The electricity goes. Think of it as a 20-volt source. All right? We now have a 20-volt source going into our rectifier. Think of V1 as a rectifier going into a capacitor going into the load. Okay? So this one conducts. It will charge up C2 as well as produce a voltage across our R1. Okay? Now, if we attempt to charge C2 through this capacitor, then current is going to be flowing. Indeed, current is flowing. This means that C1 will begin to discharge. It will drop off. Whereas C2, all right, will charge up. Now, if we just make sure that C1 is big and C2 is small, then the amount of discharge and energy provided by C1, all right, will mean that it will discharge a little, whereas C2 will charge all the way up. So hopefully, all right, the voltage drop does not become so big. You'll see your 20-volt output from this side of the thing go downward, whereas the C2 will instantaneously charge up in that short instant, as well as provide power to R1. And of course, all right, through this positive cycle, that is what is happening. All right? That's what's going to be happening. But as you can see, the voltage VO should now be much, much higher. It will be, you know, ideally 20 volts. But it will be a little bit less than that because C1 had to discharge and provide C2 with energy, okay? And then we now enter the negative cycle again, which means that when we enter the negative cycle, all right, we're back to what we started with. And what happens now is because the polarity has changed, B1 becomes open, meaning it's no longer connected, whereas this side of the circuit now recharges C1 back to, all right, 10 volts. Okay? So the left side recharges C1 back to 10 volts instantaneously. In the meantime, with this diode open, the voltage of C2, the energy of C2 continues to supply our R1. And this means that the voltage across R1 will continue to go downwards as we drain the energy from C2. All right? And then when we go back into the positive cycle, we suddenly see the output suddenly come up again, all right? As the re-energized 20 volts becomes available to recharge C2 through diode B1 and then instantaneously increase the voltage of R1. So we get this kind of a cycle, all right? Or at the output V sub zero. But hopefully you've been able to see that we are getting a voltage which is much closer or pretty close to 20 volts. 20 volts peak, all right? Theoretically, 20 volts absolute maximum. And maybe it discharges dependent on how well we choose C1 and C2. It discharges a certain amount and then goes back up to 20. So we will get what you call as a ripple, all right, in voltage whose magnitude is dependent on how much C1 and C2 discharge through the cycle by cycle situation. Okay? All right. So this is what we call as a voltage doubler. So kung ito ang ating input waveform, all right, the blue one here is our input waveform, okay, what can we see as an output V sub O? All right? So the output V sub O of our doubler is a voltage. It does not fit, all right? It's a voltage essentially that you can see that is going to be basically pretty much up here at twice the voltage, discharge, come up, discharge, come up, discharge. Okay? So yun yung ating doubler output. Okay? So much, much higher up. And yun nga, it's a DC voltage, all right? Because of this capacitor supplying that energy while the other side of it is recharged as a clamp. Okay? So clamp plus rectifier produces this output. Okay? What do you think? Is that cool or what? Okay? You know, the interesting thing about this is, all right, the interesting thing about this is, it is possible to build a circuit that is based on this idea of clamping. All right? All right? Such that the result, okay, is extending the thing. You'll notice that we have a doubler. And if we just add things, all right, it becomes a voltage tripler and a quadrupler. And so on and so forth. All right? We can just keep adding this. And then at the very end, add your rectifier, all right, to come up with a circuit that basically just keeps increasing its voltage output. Okay? All right? So here's your voltage multiplication using just capacitors and diodes. Okay? I'm not going to go into the analysis of this circuit. And be informed that it is an extremely inefficient circuit. Each and every stage that you basically add to it goes further and further and further away from the theoretical voltage that you can pick out. Because each stage that you add has its own deficiency. And of course, the next stage after it that attempts to double it or multiply it will be even less. So palayok ng palayok siya sa theoretical. But still, it is a very, very simple repetitive circuit. All right? That can be used to generate higher voltage. All right? As long as the voltage requirement is not particularly critical. And the most important thing here is that the amount of current demanded by, all right, the load at the end, okay, is modest. As long as maliit lang yung demand yung current, pwedeng gamitin. Kasi we're very, very dependent on the amount of energy that the capacitors will store. Okay? All right? Now, if you're wondering where or what is the use of such a thing, right? Well, here's one. Okay. Do you guys recognize what this is? All right? Hindi ito tennis racket. Okay. So itong mosquito, I think it's called the mosquito bat. Okay? Mosquito racket or mosquito bat. Okay? If you've ever wondered, how does the thing work? What's inside the mosquito bat? All right? So mosquito bat, the internal... Oh, nawawala kasi gusto burahin ng ano. All right? The internals of a mosquito bat. Okay? Contain a battery. Okay? A power source. Followed by an oscillator circuit which produces an alternating current. Okay? It produces an AC waveform. And from that AC waveform, all right, you have a series of capacitors and diodes arranged in multiplicative manner. I'm lying a little bit. Okay? Such that the voltage becomes high enough so that anything that winds up at the output here, all right, like a mosquito winding up at the output, gets zapped by the high voltage being generated. Okay? Okay? Now, I don't quite remember what the output voltage of these things are supposed to be. But it's pretty close to a thousand volts or so. All right? It's about a thousand volts. You need that much voltage to create a spark. Okay? Yeah, it doesn't quite really say what the output voltage is. It just provides the fact that the charging voltage is five volts. All right? So, that's a lithium-based battery pack in there. So, to get that kind of a high voltage out of five volts, it will require a humongous amount of multiplication. But that's not exactly how it's done. The oscillator, in fact, drives a transformer. The reality of it is that it drives a step-up transformer that allows the voltage to reach something in the region of about 300 volts or so. All right? All right? And then the output of the transformer goes into a tripler or something like that to bring it to the target 900 volts or so of operating DC voltage so that it's in a position to zap the mosquito. All right? All right? All right? All right? And this particular application is really exact for the limitations of this kind of a circuit. So, what did I say? Your output should not require a lot of current. And in fact, this is the case because when this thing is not zapping anything, there's actually no current load. Okay. It is used to charge up an output capacitor. All right. It's used to charge up an output capacitor to very, very high voltages, 1,000 volts. All right. And it just sits there. All right. Waiting for something to come into the, you know, the metal chicken wire. All right. And so while there's nothing there, there's really no current. There is nothing that is really discharging the voltage because once you've charged up the output capacitor, it's already charged up. Okay. So that allows it to slowly charge up through its limited capacity. It will slowly charge up the output capacitor. And when the output capacitor reaches that target 1,000 volts or so, it just stays there and doesn't demand much current anymore. Until a mosquito comes into contact, at which point the capacitor suddenly discharges. All right. And there goes the thing. The mosquito gets killed or whatever, gets stunned while this thing now is continuously operating and trying to recharge that capacitor to bring its voltage back up. Okay. So that's how the thing works. So as long as you press the button, the circuit is operational and will try to charge up this output capacitor so that it will produce the necessary voltage to zap the mosquito. Now, the capacitance at the output is made small because all you need is one discharge to kill a small insect. And you don't want to make it. That it's a dangerous weapon. Okay. Okay. So this is your application at least. All right. All right. So there's your application of doubling or tripling. You don't have to always do it. You know, the applications don't necessarily require that the voltage becomes so large or whatever. But I think the point here that this thing is trying to make is that, as you saw in this initial example, we can have a low voltage AC signal. And we can use this kind of a technique, clamp plus rectification to actually generate a voltage that would normally not have been achievable. All right. All right. Through straight rectification only. All right. All right. All right. So hopefully this is interesting. And, you know, I leave it up to your mental capacity to try to figure out how can you make a circuit that basically produces a negative 20. For example, okay? Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Let me just share this with you. Share. Where are you? This one. Yeah. Okay. So makikita natin. I've prepared this one. So, and I can't write onto this because this is LTSpice. All right. Well, actually I could, but, you know, mess up certain things. So listen na lang. Tapos, follow with your eyes. Okay. So here in this circuit, we have a voltage source, which is ready to produce a square wave. You can see that the parameters here is that it is a square wave because the thing has been set to produce pulses. All right. Which goes from negative 10 to plus 10, negative 10 to plus 10, with a certain timing. Nevermind that. It's measured in milliseconds. So frequency is, you know, in a hundred to one kilohertz or so, whatever that is. Ah, one millisecond. Oh yeah. Okay. Two milliseconds. So it's, it's a 500 Hertz signal. All right. And, uh, what's this? The capacitors in this case have been chosen that C1 is fairly big, 10 microfarad. And C2 is one microfarad. Just as I had stated earlier, the output of the rectifier, the filter capacitor there has to be quite a bit smaller than the shifting or clamping capacitor. Okay. And the rest of it is just basically exactly the same arrangement as we saw in the voltage dobler. The circuit itself follows the voltage dobler. We know that the output here is a positive. All right. Almost double output with ripple. Okay. With ripple driving a 47K resistor. So one microfarad into 47K, we expect that the discharge is fairly mild. All right. The discharge is going to be fairly mild because 47K is a fairly low current. Uh, assuming that, you know, we get 20 volts, which we won't. All right. 20 volts into 47K is only half, uh, milliampere. All right. It's just half a milliampere. So it's a small amount of discharge current, but against a one microfarad capacitor, well, you'll see that there's a, a, a definitely visible drop. No question about it. So the parameter here is that we've asked it to do simulation for 20 milliseconds. And this is long because it's longer than needed, but what you're going to see is that, um, you know, the circuit takes time to build up that energy. And then you'll see that it will come to a steady state where you get those continuous ripple, um, uh, of, of, of, of voltage, almost 20 volts dropping down, almost 20 volts dropping down. So how far off? Well, 1N4, 1, 4, 8s are, are not particularly good conductors. They're low current, uh, you know, signal, semi-signal diodes that can be used for rectification. So let's have a look at the result of this simulation here. Okay. I'm going to pull this. Oh, well, you'll be able to see it. What the hell. Okay. So the first signal that we want to be looking at, of course, is the, uh, source signal. All right. So as you can see, there's that source signal of plus 10, minus 10. All right. Plus 10, minus 10. And it is indeed the square wave, uh, with a period of two milliseconds, which means that this is a 500, 500 Hertz, uh, signal. Okay. All right. Now, what does, uh, now the thing here is it's a square wave. So you can imagine that, you know, it will instantaneously try to charge up our, uh, C1 through the one N4148. Now, again, this is not an ideal diode. So the one N4148 will have a pretty, uh, visible voltage drop 0.7 or more. In fact, it will be more than 0.7, especially when we demand a large amount of current to charge up C1. So we'll probe this point, first over here. Are you guys looking? So this is at the D1C1 junction. All right. It's at the D1C1 junction. Hindi pa ito yung output. So makikita natin dito yung shifting. Well, we should be able to see the shifting action. All right. And there's that shifting action. So you see that the voltage at the first pass, all right, is only a little bit above 18. All right. And that basically means that our diode here, all right, our diode is dropping a very, very large amount of voltage, much greater than 0.7. Okay. Much greater than 0.7. It's closer to even two volts. All right. It's a little less than two volts. Hirap talaga siya. All right. It's hard to charge up a capacitor, particularly instantaneously. All right. In the next series of cycles, we see that, you know, the thing will now be much, much less demanding. All right. And now we get a peak voltage that's pretty close to 19 volts or so, which means that our 104.148 is conducting with, you know, pretty close to one volt of drop, which is not surprising. Okay. So that's the output here at our D1, C1 junction. Okay. And it's just continuous train of pulses as we see there. And now we go to the output of the rectifier. So yung output ng rectifier, dapat makikita nga natin na magpipik siya halos sa 19 volts and then it will start discharging and then get recharged in the next cycle. So there's that output. Medyo hindi kita, palitan natin yung kulay. Let's change that to yellow, which is going to be a little bit more visible. polymer and be, ayan. Okay. So you can see that it almost reaches that peak voltage and then starts to drop off. And again, this is because of the inability to reach the peak voltage. It's basically it was D2, you know, working into that capacitor will demand that it charges C2 with a current and that means that the diode is working hard to charge up that one microfarad capacitor. Okay. So there's that output waveform. If you're having difficulty looking at it, let's try to, you know, scale this so that we don't look at the negative portion anymore. We'll just put this to zero. Okay. And hopefully you can see that a little bit better. Okay. Maybe we can just do a transient simulation for, let's change this to six milliseconds. Of course, it will redo it. Okay. So there you go with that. So hopefully you can see this. And let's remove the negative portion. balik ko rito, zero. And say, okay. All right. And so you can see now, hopefully, okay, there's that input which goes all the way to plus 10, negative 10. The shifting that happens makes this C1, D1 voltage go all the way up to almost 20 volts. And the rectified output which is in the yellow trace drops it even a little bit more. Okay. So if we put our cursor here, okay, put the cursor here, we can see that the peak voltage basically is at about 18 volts. Okay. Because this is at three milliseconds which is the peak here. and it's about 18.7 at most out of the theoretical 20 volts. 18.7. So how much is that? 18.7 minus 18.7 is, well, pretty close to the expected sort of forward conduction of 0.7 plus 0.7 which is 1.4. So tama naman. All right? So there you go with that. So it is not quite double, but hey, it's not bad at all. Okay? And because of the discharging characteristic, the voltage ripples downward to as low as 17.3 volts. So that's the discharging all right? As C2 supplies current by itself to the 47k resistor. Okay? So we can show that a little bit further. If I decrease the value of the 47k resistor to half of that, then we expect that the voltage will drop to twice the amount that it's dropping now. So it's going to be a little bit more than that because 22k is not quite half 47k. And we rerun that simulation and hopefully argh! You can see that the voltage drop is much bigger now at 16.81k, dropping down even further because it's discharging even more. Okay? Very visible that 4.7k. Oh, that's going to be a huge drop. Look at that. All right? We can see that that is a very, very significant amount of ripple right now because of the high amount of discharge relative relative to the size of the capacitor. All right? So if it's dropping by that much, you're going to get a humongous amount of ripple. You can try to compensate for that by increasing the capacitance here. What happens if I put a 10 microfarad capacitor? So 10 and 10. All right? So ano mangyayari dyan? Well, it is not going to produce a ripple will be reduced. All right? But now you can see that we have lost the ability to charge up C2. All right? Because they're of equal value, hindi na ma-charge ng mabuti ng C1 kasi nauubos siya. Okay? So again, the basic rule of thumb here is if you can, make C1, the shifting capacitor, about 10 times that of the rectifier capacitor so that it will produce a better characteristic. And so as you can see over here, we've almost gotten the original signal back. Okay? And with some further degradation in the output signal, you can see it's becoming quite weak. 17.2. Hindi natin nakuha yung 17.6 or 8 kanina. All right? And that essentially is because our diodes, the 1N4, 1,4,8 in this case, are handling a much higher current. There's much more energy that you're trying to put into 100 microfarad capacitor compared to a 10 microfarad before. So, mas hirap yung diode ngayon. Kaya hindi na siya makabigay ng ganun kataas na voltage. All right? Okay. So, I hope that you understood this and have seen what a voltage doubler should more or less do in real life. Are there questions? Ito lang ba? Questions? Questions? Okay? Mukhang tikatabad yung mga sudyante ngayon. All right. No questions? All right? If there are no questions, can I see a thumbs up, please? All right? So, let's go forward. We're not yet done. All right? Let me just move this out of the way. Okay. Let's move this out of the way and let's continue with where we were. Okay. So, the rest of this stuff is more or less easier stuff already. It's just an FYI kind of thing. So, let's go forward. Let me just put the slides back. And capture it. Show, show, show, show, show, share. Okay. So, let's go from, you know, the voltage dober, tripler, et cetera. Let's go to the next. What? Yeah. Okay. So, briefly, we'll talk about, you know, the different kinds of diodes. And then that's it. We'll close off our discussion with diodes for this particular subject, for that matter. Of course, okay, please keep in mind that everything that we've taken up about each and every one of these components that we've been introducing to you, you're expected to retain this information and you can start using it. All right? You will start using this information and knowledge. So, as you move forward through the course and forward through the different subjects, all these other subjects in the higher years will continue to rely on your knowledge of what you've taken up. So, when you get to CE-Tron 3, you will definitely be required to come up with circuits and the assumption there is whatever circuits that you need to come up with as needed by the statements or the specifications will rely on the fact that I can use voltage doubling to get this required voltage here at this point in the circuit so that it works. All right? So on and so forth. So, lahat yan. Okay? You're building your knowledge. So, light-emitting diodes. LEDs basically are specialized diodes that, surprise, surprise, give off possibly not necessarily visible light. all right? This is light when it is forward biased. Okay? So not necessarily visible. Why? Because we do have UV and infrared diodes. All right? These are still light-emitting diodes, but they produce outputs that are basically invisible to us. so, and that's basically what's, this is pretty interesting in the sense that, you know, the solid state device, all right, that's become available is now replacing all of the lighting requirements or a lot of the lighting requirements that we have solely based on the fact that they are significantly more efficient, electrically efficient, in converting power from electricity into light compared to other available technologies that produce the same transformation. Okay? They're also fairly inexpensive, all right, which makes them, of course, an ideal consumer product. All right? So, this process of giving off light is basically called electroluminescence. From electricity, we get luminous output, all right, light output, luminous output, all right, electroluminescence. Okay. LEDs, which are mostly what are shown here, used as indicators, indicators, all right, if not indicators, they're used really for entertainment. It's used for bling, all right, for making something look nicer, all right? They are all over the place. So, these are all basically through-hole LEDs. LEDs, they have legs that you insert into the PCB or use them straight off with the legs. But, there are also surface mount LEDs, which are all the more popular now, because these are the types of LEDs that you'll find in home lighting, for example, as well as modern electronics being used as indicators where very low profile and much lower cost is of advantage and importance. Okay? So, if you have any of the modern devices, such as router, Wi-Fi, access point or whatever, all right? Or even a charger, for example, which has an indicator to say that, hey, I'm on, all right? Most, a lot of the times, particularly with electronics, all right? Routers and stuff like that, they all use surface mount LEDs. And, the reason that they do that is because it is cheaper, all right, and more feasible for manufacturing to use surface mount. On the simple basis that a large part of the components on the board are surface mount devices where they don't have legs like this anymore. Okay? So, if you are assembling a board that is composed of components that are surface mount, it makes sense that the LEDs are also surface mount because the machines that are putting the components onto the board are designed to handle surface mount. Now, if you have a component there in that process that's not a surface mount, it's not a surface mount, it's not a surface mount, it's not a machine. It's not a machine. another machine, aka a person, is more likely to be the one handling and putting those other components later in the process. So, process flow. Alright? It will be slower to have a mixture of through hole and surface mount components. So, for electronics that are vastly made out of integrated circuits, microcontrollers, and so on and so forth, where 90% or practically 100% of the components can be made surface mount, that's what's going to be going into the board, all surface mount. Okay? Alright. Now, so, here, the slide is showing that, you know, LEDs are available in various forms, right? Shapes and sizes, most of these are pretty tiny, but surface mount, the casing basically has nothing to do with the color of light that they emit in certain cases. So, you can have, for example, a clear LED like this or like this. They're actually one and the same thing practically inside. The only difference is, you know, the encapsulation and what color of light they emit, alright? is based on internally what is or how this thing was made, what were the materials in the semiconductor that were used to manufacture the LED. So, looking at it inside, basically, you can see that if you've ever looked at it closely, particularly with these that are, you know, see-through and semi-see-through, those that have translucent casings, most of them are, if you look at them very well, you can see that there's one lead that goes to a larger structure, okay? There is a larger structure and then there's that smaller side of it, okay? So, what is that? Alright? So, these are diodes. So, the larger structure is the cathode and that smaller structure is the anode, okay? So, if you were to draw this as an equivalent symbol, right, this would be the light emitting diode, right? And you encircle it sometimes and then you put a symbol like this to indicate that it is an LED. These wiggly arrows that you see over here are a statement or an identifier that says that it emits photons. It emits light, alright? Without it, people will not know if it is an ordinary diode or whatever. meron na kayong tatlong symbol na LED na alam. The ordinary diode, alright, sorry, you shouldn't have entered over there. The ordinary diode, the one with the wingtips, alright, which is the zener, and this one that we just talked about right now where sometimes there's a circle, sometimes there's not, but there's those wiggly arrow lines which identify it as an LED. Okay? Alright, so there's a little flat spot on the encapsulation and which is there so that when you put it into a panel or whatever, sometimes that is used as a way to stop the thing from rotating. Alright? But bottom line is you have a cathode, it might be identifiable if you can see through the LED which one is the cathode and which one is the anode. Okay? To make this thing light, we have to put a limiting resistor and a power source that flows the current in the correct direction to light up our LED. Alright? In there, in that tiny little structure, it's mostly just the posts or the material that holds the actual semiconductor which is that tiny little thing there. Okay? It's a tiny little thing over there, right? Sitting on the carrier which is made out of copper. Alright? So this larger structure here is necessary because that's what the semiconductor is bonded to. It also provides a heat conduction path for whatever heat is produced by our semiconductor. This allows the heat to actually propagate through the metal and go to the legs and thus dissipate what little amount of heat is actually produced to the environment. For small LEDs like this, the heat is quite small, so it's pretty straightforward. Obviously for those that are running under much higher power, like those that are used for lighting purposes, we know that the LED units are fantastically efficient, they are not. It's just that they are still much more efficient than previous technologies, but they are far from perfect. The fact that they get hot basically means some of the power going in, some of that electricity is being converted into something that is not light. Okay? So some of that electricity is being converted into something that isn't light. The fact that it gets hot means that some of that energy is lost as thermal dissipation. Okay? All right. So there's your LED construction. Oh, here we go. All right. So here are examples of what we call COB or chip on board construction. All right? So the board itself contains several chips such as this. All right? And this is what you would see on inside that looking for what time is it? All right? Wala yung example korito. Okay? What would happen or what would you see if you took off the translucent bulb on the LEDs that are shaped like a standard Edison bulb? Okay? So in this case, we see that there's a mixture. We can see that there are yellow colored LEDs and there are white colored ones. And this is a mixture of two different LED types which produce a different color output. So these ones are used to produce the more yellow very incandescent colored type of light 3400 Kelvin ! type thing whereas these ones are producing the very white going towards bluish kind of color something in the order of about 6000 plus Kelvin maybe or even 7000 Kelvin. And so the idea here is these things operate at the same time so that the combined light looks like it's closer to 5000 Kelvin or so which gives us a nice balanced kind of light closer to sunlight for example. So you get a mixture of those two colors and that's the color that comes out. So one of the pitfalls of LED technology is that by itself the LED in itself produces a very monochromatic output. The semiconductor material produces only one wavelength of light output. And monochromatic colors are not viable to the human eye. We can illuminate things using monochromatic light, but you can't see color from it and they look very, very thin. So I don't know if you might be able to recall many years ago, all right, when there was a change from mercury lamp lighting on the streets, these were white colored lights, over into a newer technology, which was sodium halide, all right, sodium halide lamps. And these sodium halide lamps had a very, very orange yellow color. So one thing about sodium halide is that they are much more efficient than mercury lamps, right? But on the downside, the color that comes out of it is very yellow orange and a lot of people complain that they could not see well, even if it was very bright, parang mahirap makakita. And the reason for it is that sodium halide has a very narrow spectrum, right? Mercury lamps have a fairly wide spectrum because mercury lamps actually produce an output that is almost purely UV. And then that lamp body or the housing has a phosphor coating so that when the UV strikes the phosphor, the phosphor reemits a wide spectrum light that is white, all right? with sodium halide technology, the lamp itself produces a single monochromatic type output which is orange-ish yellow, and you can't see well with that. And that was the original problem as well with LEDs. That's why multicolor LEDs were developed so that you'd get a wider spectrum. And this is one of the ways by which that is happening. they actually put different LEDs who's got a specialty wavelength and when you combine it, you get a wider spectrum. Okay? So a surface mount chip looks something like this, all right? Versus a COB type where even this mounting body itself is not even there. Direction na siya. All right? Kaya tinawag na chip on board. It really just is almost nothing left. Under it are the metal semiconductors that are soldered directly onto the surface of this piece here, which is basically made out of aluminum so that the heat produced by these devices as they operate go directly onto the aluminum which allows the aluminum to dissipate the heat into the environment. and these things can get pretty hot through that process. Okay? All right. So it's almost nine o'clock. To close this thing off, all right, we have, as I said, LEDs that produce various wavelength outputs all the way from ultraviolet to violet all the way down to blah, blah, blah, red and, in fact, even infrared where the wavelength is 760 nanometers or more, and you'll see that essentially this is achieved by different combinations of doping. All of them are basically silicon with various different other elements for doping to create those different colors or wavelengths. And as a result of that, each and every LED's forward voltage is different. Okay? The forward voltage is different with the red-colored LED having typically the lowest forward voltage. Okay? So, hindi sila pare-pareho. Ang ordinary diode, sinasabi natin pagka-silicon, ! 0.7 ang forward voltage, more or less. You'll see that LEDs have a much, much higher starting forward voltage. and as you increase the current through the LED, that voltage will increase even further. Okay? So, we can easily get blue-colored LEDs now. You'll notice walang white. Okay? Bakit sir, walang white? Kasi nga, ang white kailangan mo ng multiple types to produce. Alright? And typically, what they do now is they take the blue or the violet and they add phosphorus to re-emit part of the blue light spectrum so that you can get green as well as red through phosphor technology where the input photons wavelengths are re-emitted at a lower wavelength. Alright? Or longer wavelength. That's what the phosphors do. Okay? Alright. And unfortunately, it's 9 o'clock so I have to stop here. There are a few other diodes that are part of the presentation and next meeting we'll spend a small amount of time just to cover that. That's only five minutes worth. And that's it. We're done with diodes. We will go talk about transistors after this. Okay? Alright. So I'm going to stop here. I don't think that there would be any questions. Or if there are, we're out of time. But please hold on to those questions so that the next time we meet, some of you might be curious about LEDs, for example. So the next time we meet, write down the question if you like. And so the next time we meet, you can ask me and we can easily backtrack on it. Okay? So thank you for joining us today. Thumbs up if there's no important question or clarification. Okay pa tayo? Yeah? Alright? Okay, so thank you very much. I'll see you next time. Bye.
